Markets across Eastern Europe remained mired in an autumn slump this week, with analysts seeing little on the horizon to break the bearish trend.
Stock Exchanges in Warsaw, Prague, Bratislava, Bucharest, Zagreb and Ljubljana all lost ground on the week. Budapest bucked the trend, rising slightly, although it appeared to lose steam by the end of the week.
PRAGUE
Not even a strong showing by the centre-right governing coalition in Senate elections at the weekend could break the Prague Stock Exchange out of its current slump, as the PX50 index dipped 0.8 points on the week to close on Thursday at 509.3.
Analysts said that while the coalition of Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus may feel heartened by the showing which gave him a majority to the Czech upper house, which will have little power, investors remain put off by poor market regulation.
"I'm a little sceptical about the possibility that the Senate will help bring changes to the market," said Pavel Sobisek of Zivnostenska Banka.
"I think there will be a lot of pressure from market participants on the government to do something...but I have not seen any signs of a change in attitude of the coalition with respect to this topic."
Investors have long complained that market regulation and legislation in the Czech Republic is weak, providing little protection for minority shareholders.
WARSAW
The Warsaw Stock Exchange stayed virtually flat this week and analysts were divided over the market's direction.
Some said the bourse could extend its three-week sideways trend as no fresh signals were in sight. "We are still in a horizontal trend and...I see no factors which could help create a clear direction for the market," said Mateusz Andrzejewski, an analyst at Pekao SA brokerage.
Others saw the generally positive economic climate as a strong enough impulse that it could help the bourse climb above 14,000 points next week.
Analysts said a senior central bank official's comment on Tuesday about a possible rise in interest rates next year was bringing some uncertainty to the bourse but was unlikely to signficantly hurt prices.
BUDAPEST
Hungarian shares started off the weekend strongly, boosted by a government decision to hike energy prices, but they ran out of steam by the middle of the week.
Oil and gas company MOL led the charge, but dealers said its weakening on Thursday could be a harbinger.
"MOL turned around today (on Thursday), that is a warning sign," said New York Broker's Kalman Schuszter. "Sellers are stronger now." The BUX index closed on Thursday at 3,674.61, up 3.1 percent from Monday's open.
BRATISLAVA
Slovak share prices continued their freefall on the Bratislava Stock Exchange which has lost about 25 percent since the end of August.
The 12-share SAX index fell 12.49 points on the week to close at 161.82 on Thursday.
Dealers said the silver lining to the bourse's woes may be that prices are becoming so cheap that foreign investors will soon be lured back.
BUCHAREST
Scant demand kept volumes modest at both weekly sessions in Bucharest, with turnover low and most prices edging down or staying flat.
The unofficial VAB index inched down from the previous session by 1.1 percent to 294.2 points, while the BIG index eased 1.07 percent to 293.41.
Fertiliser maker Azomures SA dominated trading, while newcomer, an oilfield equipment maker, put on a poor show.
ZAGREB
Croatian stocks were mostly lower in dwindling trade and analysts said they could see no end to the bearish period as big buyers continue to shy away from the market because of political developments.
Croatia has been shaken by a wave of strikes, and last week Zagreb saw its biggest protest in years.
LJUBLJANA
Political concerns were also apparent in Ljubljana this week, with investors waiting for a new prime minister to be named, probably in the second half of December.
"The market will be uneasy until it is clear who will form the new government," one trader said. The SBI index fell 6,7 points from Monday's open to close on Thursday at 1,145.5.
Although the Liberal Democrats of current Prime Minister Janez Drnovsek were the strongest single party in the general election, winning 25 out of 90 parliamentary seats, they are facing a loose alliance of rightist "Spring" parties, who got 45 seats.
		  CLOSE     WEEK'S CHANGE    1996/HIGH    1996/LOW
		  NOV 28	NET     PCT
 CESI	  1,391.77   - 11.12  -0.79   1,544.70     959.24
 PRAGUE	  509.3	-0.8   -0.16     582.0	425.9
 WARSAW     13,696.7     -26.4   -0.2   15,078.7    7,725.2
 BUDAPEST    3,674.61   +110.66  +3.1    3,728.58   1,557.91
 BRATISLAVA    161.82    -12.49  -7.17     226.34     150.4
 VAB-Index     294.2	-4.83  -1.6	879.29     285.3
 BIG-Index     293.41     -4.96  -1.6	820.9	284.29
 LJUBLJANA   1,145.5	-6.7   -0.6    1,589.18     891.93
All-time highs: CESI 1,544.70 (Sept 2/1996); WIG 20,760.3 (March 8, 1994); SBI 1,598.02 (June 28/1994); PX50 1,002.4 (April 7/1994); BUX 3,728.58 (Oct 17/1996); SAX 402.3 (Feb/1994). ($=3,570 lei)
The Prague Stock Exchange continued to gain ground on Thursday, but analysts said they are not convinced the beleaguered bourse's fortunes have turned around, attributing the rise to thin domestic buying.
The PSE sputtered its way through most of autumn, losing close to 20 percent as key investors sold off positions, tired of a market characterised as unregulated and murky.
The bourse has showed signs of rebounding recently -- gaining in 15 of the past 16 sessions -- but analysts said they saw little change in market sentiment, and mostly domestic trading as investment funds settle positions before year-end.
The PX50 index was up 0.25 percent at 519.5 at its daily price fixing on Thursday, putting the bourse 8.3 percent higher than its low in mid-November.
"This doesn't really look like a rebound to me. (Mainly) there's a bit of domestic buying and some of the local brokers are just bidding up the market," Alex Angell of the brokerage Wood and Company told Reuters.
Despite being eastern Europe's most-capitalised bourse, the Czech market has long been plagued by inadequate legislation that investors complain fails to provide protection for minority shareholders.
Under the Czech Republic's Securities Act, which was devised to handle the logistics of the government's massive voucher privatisation scheme, the Securities Registry (SCP) is bound by law to provide services such as moving securities to and from client accounts.
Since the SCP does not reveal any details of transactions, including prices and volumes, brokers have taken to the SCP because of its privacy and faster settlement process.
The problems have restrained the PSE which sees on average $4-$6 million of stock changing hands each day, compared with $15 million turnover in Warsaw, a much smaller market.
"There are clearly investors who have decided to stay away from this market because of its opaqueness and are still on the sidelines," said one international trader.
"This is the case especially at the end of the year when a lot of local funds push prices all over the place in order to get a desired result on their books for the year," he added.
But many analysts said that all hope is not lost for the bourse.
With the market near, or at its bottom, many shares are looking quite cheap, and a lot of larger foreign and domestic investors that have waited out the current downtrend will probably start to get back into the market, though maybe not not before year's end.
"I expect most of the buying to come in the New Year, but I think it means that investors already familiar with the market should do something now," said Danial Gladis, head of the brokerage Atlantik Financni Trhy.
Market officials have also begun taking steps to correct the problems which should slowly lure back disenchanted investors.
In April, parliament approved a series of market reforms to compel companies and fund managers to be more open and accountable. A key element tackles the chronic problem of slow and irregular reporting of company earnings and actions.
The PSE itself has taken several steps to brings more transparency to the market, stressing in particular the need for the early creation of an independent watchdog, though analysts said a lack of political will to establish the body remains.
They added that the often-mentioned mid-June launch target for an oversight commission probably will not be met.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Prague Stock Exchange continued to gain ground on Thursday, but analysts said they were not convinced the beleaguered bourse's fortunes had turned around, attributing the rise to thin domestic buying.
The bourse has showed signs of rebounding recently -- gaining in 15 of the past 16 sessions. But analysts saw little change in market sentiment amid mostly domestic trading as investment funds settled positions before the end of the year.
"This doesn't really look like a rebound to me. (Mainly) there's a bit of domestic buying and some of the local brokers are just bidding up the market," Alex Angell of the brokerage Wood and Company said.
The PX50 index closed up 0.56 percent at 521.1 at its daily price fixing on Thursday, putting the bourse about nine percent higher than its low in mid-November.
The PSE stumbled through most of the autumn, losing close to 20 percent as key investors sold positions, tired of a market characterised as unregulated and murky.
Although eastern Europe's most-capitalised bourse, the Czech market has long been plagued by poor legislation that investors say fails to provide protection for minority shareholders.
Under the Czech Republic's Securities Act, devised to handle the logistics of the government's massive voucher privatisation scheme, the Securities Registry (SCP) is bound by law to provide services such as moving securities to and from client accounts.
Since the SCP does not reveal any details of transactions, including prices and volumes, local brokers have taken to the SCP because of its privacy and faster settlement process.
But this has restrained activity on the PSE which sees on average $4-6 million of stock turnover each day, compared with $15 million in Warsaw, a much smaller market.
"There are clearly investors who have decided to stay away from this market because of its opaqueness and are still on the sidelines," said one international trader.
"This is the case especially at the end of the year when a lot of local funds push prices all over the place in order to get a desired result on their books for the year," he added.
But many analysts said that hope is not lost for the bourse.
They expected investors to buy back into the market as the downtrend bottoms out, although maybe not before the end of the year.
"I expect most of the buying to come in the New Year, but I think it means that investors already familiar with the market should do something now," said Danial Gladis, head of the brokerage Atlantik Financni Trhy.
Market officials have also begun taking steps to correct the problems which should slowly lure back disenchanted investors.
In April, parliament approved a series of market reforms to compel companies and fund managers to be more open and accountable. A key element tackles the chronic problem of slow and irregular reporting of company earnings and actions.
The PSE itself has taken several steps to brings more transparency to the market, stressing in particular the need for the early creation of an independent watchdog, though analysts said a lack of political will to establish the body remains.
The Prague Stock Exchange continued to gain ground on Thursday, but analysts said they are not convinced the beleaguered bourse's fortunes have turned around, attributing the rise to thin domestic buying.
The bourse has showed signs of rebounding recently -- gaining in 15 of the past 16 sessions. But analysts saw little change in market sentiment amid mostly domestic trading as investment funds settled positions before the end of the year.
"This doesn't really look like a rebound to me. (Mainly) there's a bit of domestic buying and some of the local brokers are just bidding up the market," Alex Angell of the brokerage Wood and Company said.
The PX50 index was up 0.25 percent at 519.5 at its daily price fixing on Thursday, putting the bourse 8.3 percent higher than its low in mid-November.
The PSE stumbled through most of the autumn, losing close to 20 percent as key investors sold positions, tired of a market characterised as unregulated and murky.
Although eastern Europe's most-capitalised bourse, the Czech market has long been plagued by poor legislation that investors say fails to provide protection for minority shareholders.
Under the Czech Republic's Securities Act, devised to handle the logistics of the government's massive voucher privatisation scheme, the Securities Registry (SCP) is bound by law to provide services such as moving securities to and from client accounts.
Since the SCP does not reveal any details of transactions, including prices and volumes, local brokers have taken to the SCP because of its privacy and faster settlement process.
But this has restrained activity on the PSE which sees on average $4-6 million of stock turnover each day, compared with $15 million in Warsaw, a much smaller market.
"There are clearly investors who have decided to stay away from this market because of its opaqueness and are still on the sidelines," said one international trader.
"This is the case especially at the end of the year when a lot of local funds push prices all over the place in order to get a desired result on their books for the year," he added.
But many analysts said that hope is not lost for the bourse.
They expected investors to buy back into the market as the downtrend bottoms out, though maybe not not before year's end.
"I expect most of the buying to come in the New Year, but I think it means that investors already familiar with the market should do something now," said Danial Gladis, head of the brokerage Atlantik Financni Trhy.
Market officials have also begun taking steps to correct the problems which should slowly lure back disenchanted investors.
In April, parliament approved a series of market reforms to compel companies and fund managers to be more open and accountable. A key element tackles the chronic problem of slow and irregular reporting of company earnings and actions.
The PSE itself has taken several steps to brings more transparency to the market, stressing in particular the need for the early creation of an independent watchdog, though analysts said a lack of political will to establish the body remains.
Czech consumer inflation continued its gradual downtrend in November, but analysts said they do not expect a loosening of the central bank's tight monetary policy in the short-term.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said November inflation, month-on-month, was 0.5 percent, the same as in October, putting the year-on-year rate at 8.6 percent, down from 8.7 percent the previous month.
The key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, edged up slightly to 8.8 percent from 8.7 percent in October, but is down from 9.3 percent in November 1995.
"The year-on-year figures basically look good. There is a very moderate but still further decrease and it appears the year's average inflation will land just below nine percent," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance told Reuters.
The CSU said in a report that the biggest influence on the November inflation rate was food, drinks and tobacco products which rose 0.4 percent in the month, along withy clothing, up 0.9 percent, and transportation, which rose 1.3 percent.
Together these three categories accounted for 80 percent of the inflation figure, it said.
Most analysts agreed that there seems little chance the Czech National Bank (CNB), the central bank, will ease its tight monetary policy in the near future despite the sustained downtrend in CPI.
Curbing inflation has been at the heart of almost all of the CNB's policies. This summer the CNB raised its key discount rate one percentage point to 10.5 percent, and hiked minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent of deposits to squeeze off surging domestic demand.
The moves have appeared to signficantly slow growth in the money supply, which is now at the lower end of the central bank's 13 to 17 percent growth target.
"These (inflation) figures may give the CNB some room to move rates, but I doubt they will do it immediately. The CNB seems to like to set its policies in January," said Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings.
"The key question remains how the government will limit wage growth, until this is answered, I doubt the central bank will make any major policy changes toward inflation."
Added another local economist: "I think this slow downtrend is sustainable since the central bank's measures may be seen even more in the coming months, though it must be careful to ensure GDP growth which has been lagging lately."
Czech GDP grew 4.0 percent year-on-year in the second quarter of this year according to preliminary data, slowing from a 4.3 percent growth in the first quarter.
The CSU originally forecast 5.1 percent growth this year after 4.8 percent last year, but lowered the estimate to 4.8 percent in November due in large part to the central bank measures.
Another signal inflation will continue to ease, and in turn push rates down, is the favourable development of industrial producer prices, which stood 4.1 percent higher, year-on-year, in October, down from 7.8 percent in October 1995.
"Of course the central bank may ease rates, but I would be cautious. I would expect it to wait until maybe halfway through next year," said Patria's Kupka.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has thrown his support behind the creation of an independent market regulator, but analysts said on Monday it will take more than that to revive confidence in the embattled Prague bourse.
Klaus, speaking after a meeting on financial market regulation on Sunday, said the market was moving from its first phase, when it was created under the mass voucher privatisation programme of 1992-95, towards becoming a standard market.
He added that everybody understood that this process would happen gradually.
But analysts and traders said that while the moves are a welcome start, only concrete results will now be able to lure investors back to the market.
"It shows a trend that the government knows there is a problem and is working on solutions," said Jan Sykora, a broker at Wood and Company.
"But confidence in the Czech market has been decimated and there is a strong lack of confidence, especially among foreign investors...who now want to see real results, and not just proclamations."
Added Radim Bajgar of ING Barings: "It's positive, but we have heard these announcements before -- results will be the best medicine for the market."
While markets in Poland and Budapest have posted solid gains this year, the Prague Stock Exchange has sputtered, especially since the beginning of September when a bear run triggered by a foreign investor selloff took some 20 percent out of the ailing bourse.
These investors, and some local players, have been highly critical of the lack of transparency on Czech markets, and particularly about the failure of the Securites Centre, where the overwhelming majority of trades are registered, to release detailed price information.
"A lot international clients shudder when you mention the Czech market. They just don't know what real prices here are because so little information comes from the Securities Centre, where so much of the trading occurs," said one fund manager.
Until now, Klaus has showed little enthusiasm for a plan by PSE Chairman Tomas Jezek to create a body modelled on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Klaus has long believed market regulation, now conducted by a department in the Finance Ministry, should be minimal.
But he capitulated on Sunday, saying "there is a dominant opinion that there is little transparency on the our capital market".
"As a long-term solution we want to create an independent capital supervision (body). That requires legislation and an number of other things," said Klaus following the meeting.
He also announced that all prices of OTC deals registered at the central securities centre (SCP) would be published from February 1. He gave no indication of whether the names of buyers and sellers would also be released.
Jezek wants to create a Czech SEC by 1998 but Klaus gave no indication of when he thought it could be set up.
Klaus said that as a first step the market supervision department of the Finance Ministry would be transformed into a "Securities Bureau" also from February 1, 1997.
It would remain under the ministry but would have more staff and an 11-member advisory commission for the bureau would also be set up including market participants. The bureau would intensify control of investment funds and companies, he said.
Analysts said that once more regulation did find its way to the market, those same investors who have shunned Czech shares will probably return.
"Because most foreign investors have such a poor view of this market, they are under-invested here. So once you start to create better conditions, you should see it translate into a strong positive trend next year," Sykora said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has thrown his support behind the creation of an independent market regulator, but analysts said on Monday it would take more than that to revive confidence in the embattled Prague bourse.
Klaus, speaking after a meeting on market regulation on Sunday, said the Czech bourse was moving towards becoming a normal market after its creation under the mass voucher privatisation programme of 1992-95.
Everybody understood this process would happen gradually, he said. But analysts and traders said that while the moves were a welcome start, only concrete results would be able to lure investors back to the market.
"It shows a trend that the government knows there is a problem and is working on solutions," said Jan Sykora, a broker at Wood and Company.
"But confidence in the Czech market has been decimated and there is a strong lack of confidence, especially among foreign investors...who now want to see real results, and not just proclamations."
While markets in Poland and Budapest have posted solid gains this year, the Prague Stock Exchange has suffered. Since the beginning of September, a bear run triggered by a selloff by foreign investors has wiped about 20 percent off the market.
Radim Bajgar of ING Barings called Klaus' comments positive, but results would be the best medicine for the market.
Foreign investors and some local players have been highly critical of the lack of transparency in Czech markets -- particularly the failure of the Securites Centre, where the overwhelming majority of trades are registered, to release detailed price information.
"A lot international clients shudder when you mention the Czech market. They just don't know what real prices here are because so little information comes from the Securities Centre, where so much of the trading occurs," said one fund manager.
Until now, Klaus has showed little enthusiasm for a plan by PSE Chairman Tomas Jezek to create a body modelled on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Klaus has long believed market regulation, now conducted by a department in the Finance Ministry, should be minimal. But he capitulated on Sunday.
"As a long-term solution we want to create an independent capital supervision (body). That requires legislation and an number of other things," Klaus said after the meeting.
He also announced that all prices of OTC deals registered at the Central Securities Centre (SCP) would be published from February 1. He gave no indication of whether the names of buyers and sellers would also be released.
Jezek wants to create a Czech SEC by 1998 but Klaus gave no indication of when he thought it could be set up.
Klaus said that as a first step the market supervision department of the Finance Ministry would be transformed into a "Securities Bureau" with more staff from February 1, 1997.
Analysts said that once more regulation was imposed, investors who have shunned Czech shares would probably return.
"Because most foreign investors have such a poor view of this market, they are under-invested here. So once you start to create better conditions, you should see it translate into a strong positive trend next year," Sykora said.
Czech economic growth is expected to continue slowing down in the third quarter, but analysts said the central bank's fight against inflation still comes first, and interest rates will remain untouched.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) is scheduled to release third quarter real GDP figures at 0900 local time (0800 GMT) on Thursday.
A Reuters survey of local economists showed growth was expected to ease to about 4.2 percent for the first three quarters of the year, year-on-year.
That compares with a rise in gdp of 4.8 percent for the same period in 1995. GDP growth for the first half of 1996 was 4.3 percent.
But analysts said that even though the central bank's tight monetary policy is restricting the economy, they saw no chance of a loosening in interest rates in the near future.
"Interest rates have been very high and that has taken its toll...but I don't think we're going to see a move in base rates yet," Susanne Hallergard, an economist at ING Barings told Reuters on Wednesday.
"It's an inflation versus growth battle and the central bank appears much more willing to sacrifice growth to push inflation down."
Added Martin Kupka of Patria Finance: "Whether the central bank touches rates will depend on inflation, and not GDP, especially in the first few months of next year."
Analysts said they expected a sharp year-on-year drop in GDP growth for the third quarter alone, since last year's 6.3 percent figure was skewed by the resumption of production at Skoda Auto after a break to retool for its new Felicia model.
They added, however, that while the CSU was recently forced to cut its original year-end forecast of 4.8 percent growth from 5.1 percent, the economy should accelerate in the fourth quarter to meet the target.
"Given private consumption developement and fixed capital investment, I expect fourth quarter growth to be greater, and put the full year figure at close to five percent," said Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka.
He added that an economic upturn in Germany, a major trading partner, could also begin to show some effects in GDP later in the year.
CSU officials have blamed lower foreign capital inflows, lower profits of domestic companies and higher costs of credit following central bank tightening moves earlier this year which have resulted in the lower growth of investment demand.
In the summer, the central bank hiked its key discount rate by one full percentage point to 10.5 percent, and implemented a series of measures incluing repo rate hikes and raising minimum reserve requirements to choke a burgeoning money supply.
The moves have shown their effects recently, with the M2 money supply, which measures currency, demand deposits, time and savings deposits, and foreign currency deposits, easing to 9.8 percent in October from 11.6 percent in September.
In addition, inflation has continued its gradual easing, dippping to 8.6 percent year-on-year from 8.7 percent the previous month, its fourth straight monthly decline.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Prague Stock Exchange, battered and bruised in 1996, should recover next year as officials implement plans to shore up confidence in the sagging bourse, analysts said.
Many an analyst had predicted similar bullish fortunes for the bourse in 1996, only to be undermined by lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency.
But a new commitment from Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and bourse officials to clean up the market has once again triggered an optimistic outlook for the coming year.
"Because most foreign investors have such a poor view of this market, they are under-invested here," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company.
"Once you start to create better conditions, you should see it translate into a strong positive trend next year," Sykora said.
The bourse started 1996 with a bang, rising 36 percent over the first three quarters to put the PX50 index at a year-high of 582.0 in September.
But it went out with a whimper as investors stepped up criticism of the lack of transparency in Czech markets and particularly of the failure of the Central Securites Registry (SCP) to release detailed price information. Most off-market trades are registered at the SCP.
While smaller exchanges in Budapest and Warsaw built on earlier gains, the PX50 dropped by nearly a quarter to just above 500 points, a level where it continues to linger at.
After months of decline, government officials finally threw their support behind the creation of an independent supervisory body for the market, but it will take months to develop it.
Until then, the finance ministry is supposed to transfer its market oversight department into a separate office which will get more resources from the government to do its job.
Until recently, Prime Minister Klaus had showed little enthusiasm for a plan by PSE chairman Tomas Jezek to create a body modelled on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Klaus has long believed market regulation, now conducted by the finance ministry, should be minimal.
But he capitulated in mid-December saying an independent body was needed, and then surprisingly announced that all prices of OTC deals registered at the Securities Centre would be published from February 1.
"An absolute priority for 1997 is the creation of an SEC-type body," Jezek told Reuters. "It is a positive step in the development of our market. I hope it will show our commitment to making the market more transparent."
Though it may not be a panacea to the market woes, analysts agree that the oversight commission would be the most important step the PSE could take in 1997.
"The lack of regulation was one of the main reasons for the bourse's fall and with improved market regulation, the stable political situation and good corporate earnings growth, the PSE should perform well," said Miroslav Nosal of Patria Finance.
He added that Patria expects the PX50 index to rise by about 20 percent next year to "around the 600 level".
But transparency is not the only issue that will effect the bourse in 1997, analysts say.
Once the toast of post-Communist Europe's transformation process, the Czech economy has, like the market itself, underperformed this year.
Growth in industrial production has slowed, compared with 1995, amid a broader slowing in GDP growth which stood at 4.0 percent year-on-year for the first three quarters, putting full year original estimates of 5.1 percent virtually out of reach.
In addition, the central bank's constant struggle to keep inflation in check has pushed interest rates up sharply, cooling private consumption and hurting the bottom lines at many Czech firms.
"Investment costs have been significantly higher for a lot of companies, and we are seeing this eat into the bottom lines of smaller firms that can't raise money abroad," said one foreign analyst.
But many blue chip firms such as telephone monopoly SPT Telecom have continued to invest heavily this year, and according to Anna Bosong, an Eastern European equities analysts at ING Barings, should show a marked improvement next year.
She said that ING has forecast a contraction in earnings per share (EPS) of 4.9 percent for the Czech market in 1996, but sees a turnaround in 1997 to an increase of 10.9 percent.
"Czech firms have been investing heavily in improving capacity and basic infrastructure and this should come back to help in the coming year, improving earnings performance as well," she said.
The Czech Republic may have reached the final of Euro '96 but the supporters are far from happy.
"It wasn't like this under Communism," they say.
Once a refrain uttered only by those longing for the old days of planned economies and a four-hour workday, the phrase has been heard with alarming regularity since the country's football union announced plans to cancel live broadcasts of matches on public television beginning in 1998.
Instead, the Czech-Moravian Football Association (CMFS), will begin broadcasting only pay-per-view first division matches in its 1998-99 season as part of a marketing agreement signed recently with the Dutch firm Nethold.
For once the supporters are not complaining about the quality of the football, simply the fact that they can no longer watch their national team in action.
"Soccer is not public entertainment anymore, but pure business," Jaroslav Vacek, of STES, the CMFS's marketing partner, was quoted as saying in the weekly newspaper, Prague Post.
Vacek did not discuss specific details of the deal but it is believed to be worth about 100 million crowns ($3.7 million) annually, which should translate into a rise in television revenues of about 80 percent for each of the first division's 16 clubs.
But that is not a view which goes down well with the millions of fans in a soccer-crazed country who crowd around televisions on Fridays to watch the cream of Czech soccer.
There is increasing bitterness that goal line now means bottom line, that Czech soccer now means cheque soccer.
"The game must evolve, but this is a little too much. Money and profit aren't the only things in the world," said Dusan Suchanek, an accountant in Prague.
"I think a lot of fans are tired of hearing about economics in their daily lives and now it's invaded soccer. This is one of the strongest ties we have as a nation and without television access many may leave the game behind."
Since the fall of communism in 1989, Czech sport in general, and soccer in particular, has been hit by a mass exodus of athletes in search of greater wealth and opportunity in the West.
This summer, they stunned the soccer world when they reached the final of Euro '96 with a band of relatively unknown players and only lost to Germany in extra-time.
Soon, the likes of Patrik Berger, now with Liverpool, and Karel Poborsky, signed by Manchester United, were capitalising on a flood of money into English soccer brought about, in large part, by lucrative television contracts.
Indeed, with the creation of the Premier League four years ago and the decision by satellite broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting Plc to make football one of its core programming focuses, Britain's top 20 clubs are now among the richest in Europe.
With each club expected to receive 10 million pounds ($16.7 million) a year out of a total 670 million pound BSkyB package from next year onwards, television rights alone will help bankroll the further expansion of plush, all-seater stadiums and lucrative player signings.
"We hope that the pay-per-view system, which has been successfully implemented in western Europe, will develop in the Czech Republic too and that the local market with television rights will expand. Soccer should only profit from it," Vacek said.
But patience is running short after the German firm UFA, which holds the rights to televise Czech World Cup qualifying games, put a $1 million price tag on the team's away games, a move which meant that Czech viewers missed the first live broadcast of a key national team game in 21 years.
It ended in a 1-0 loss to Yugoslavia but, even so, the complaints from disappointed fans were heard up and down the country.
"This would never have happened under communism. Since we won the European Championship in 1976, I have not missed a game. This is progress?" said Jan Krupka as he sat glumly on a bar stool watching an old soccer video.  REUTER
Britain's Bass plc has added to its already substantial holdings in the Czech Republic by increasing its stake in brewer Pivovar Radegast a.s..
Radegast Director Jan Sikora told Reuters on Tuesday that Bass had raised its stake in the company -- one of the "Big Four" Czech brewers -- by about 10 percent to 30.07 percent, but would not say from whom the stake had been purchased.
The Czech news agency CTK, quoting unnamed sources, reported earlier that Bass had bought 9.97 percent of Radegast from Raiffeisen Capital and Investment Praha.
But Raiffeisen and Bass officials would not confirm the report and Sikora would not disclose any further details.
The Prague-based bank Investicni a Postovni Banka a.s. is Radegast's largest shareholder with a 34 percent stake while a fund managed by the investment arm of Czech insurer Ceska Pojistovna a.s. holds 30 percent.
In July, Bass took an initial 20 percent stake in Radegast, augmenting Bass's Czech portfolio which includes a majority holding in Prague Breweries (Prazske Pivovary) and two smaller provincial beer makers.
Since buying shares in 1993 in Prague Breweries, makers of the flagship lager Staropramen, Bass has aggressively marketed Czech beer abroad and especially in Britain.
Radegast, which brews a popular lager with the same name and which was a major sponsor of the Czech national football team in the European championships last year, is based near the northeastern city of Ostrava.
In the first nine months of 1996, it posted a gross profit of 281.5 million crowns ($10.35 million), up from 230 million for the same period in 1995. ($1=27.19 Czech Crown)
Britain's Bass plc has added to its already substantial holdings in the Czech Republic by increasing its stake in the northeastern brewer Pivovar Radegast a.s..
Radegast Director Jan Sikora told Reuters on Tuesday that Bass had raised its stake in the Czech firm by about 10 percent to 30.07 percent, but would not say from whom the stake was purchased.
The CTK news agency, quoting unnamed sources, reported earlier on Tuesday that Bass had purchased 9.97 percent of Radegast from Raiffeisen Capital and Investment Praha.
But Raiffeisen and Bass officials said they were unable to confirm the report. Sikora would not disclose any further details of the sale.
The Prague-based bank Investicni a Postovni Banka a.s. is Radegast's largest shareholder with a 34 percent stake while a fund managed by the investment arm of the Czech insurer Ceska Pojistovna, holds 30 percent.
In July, Bass took an initial 20 percent stake in Radegast, one of the country's four largest brewers, augmenting Bass's Czech portfolio which includes a majority stake in the Prague Breweries (Prazske Pivovary) and two smaller provincial brew houses.
Since acquiring shares in the Prague Breweries, makers of the flagship lager Staropramen, in 1993, Bass has moved agressively to market Czech beer, namely Staropramen, abroad and especially in Britain.
Bass has said it hopes to integrate their Czech operations with the other breweries which have merged with the Prague plant.
Radegast, which brews a popular lager with the same name and which was a major sponsor of the Czech national football team in the European championship, is based near the northeastern city of Ostrava.
Over the first nine months of 1996, the firm posted a gross profit of some 281.5 million crowns, up from 230 million for the same period in 1995.
Czech blue chip shares closed mostly higher on the Prague Stock Exchange on Wednesday, helping spur the bourse to its third consecutive advancing session.
CEZ, Komercni Banka, Chemopetrol and Ceska Sporitelna all gained ground to boost the PX50 index 3.1 points, or 0.57 percent, to 550.4. Overall, 184 of the 375 issues trading gained ground, while 131 lost and 60 held steady.
CEZ, which crossed the 1,000 barrier on Tuesday for the first time since October, moved further ahead with a 13 crown rise to 1,024. Komercni Banka closed up 56 crowns at 2,356 and Chemopetrol gained 27 crowns to 1,200.
Tobacco company Tabak continued its uptrend with a 43 crown gain to 7,050.
Brewers Prazske Pivovary and Pivovar Radegast both record strong sessions, rising 55 crowns and 83 crowns respectively on the heels of British brewer Bass's announcement that it had increased its stake in Radegast by 10 percent to 33 percent.
Bass's Czech country manager, Mervyn Childs, said the British firm wants to further raise its stake in Radegast and set up a possible merger with Prazske in which it holds a majority stake.
"In the medium to longer term we would like to increase our stake (in Radegast) but we'll do that hopefully through discussion and agreement with other major shareholders," Childs told Reuters.
"In the medium to longer term yes we would like to consider a merger of Radegast and Prague Breweries group," he added.
Analysts said Bass's announcement could push both issues higher in the coming weeks, as investors look to cash in on Bass's hunger to expand in the sector.
"Bass appears to be serious about raising its stakes, especially in Radegast, and this could add as much as five percent to its share price," said one analyst.
Czech annual average consumer inflation eased slightly in 1996, not as much as original government forecasts but still pleasing analysts.
The Czech Statistical Bureau said on Thursday that its key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, closed the year at 8.8 percent, down from 9.1 percent for 1995.
Despite missing the government's original eight percent forecast, analysts said they were optimistic the central bank's tight monetary policies were hitting the mark, bringing inflation back under control after a strong first half surge.
"The final outcome on average inflation is a success because of its favourable development in the second half of the year," Martin Kupka, an economist at investment bank Patria Finance told Reuters.
"Of course in the longer run, we still need to see a more rapid decrease in inflation," he added.
The CSU said month-on-month inflation for December was 0.5 percent, unchanged from November, putting consumer prices 8.6 percent higher, year-on-year, steady with the previous month.
CSU chairman Edvard Outrata told Reuters that 1996 core inflation remained around five percent with government price dergeulations comprising the rest.
But he said 1997 inflation would rest on whether or not the government decides to take further, stronger steps on freeing up energy and housing prices.
The CSU said that price increases in foodstuffs, leisure and textile sectors accounted for some 80 percent of the monthly CPI rise.
The CSU said industrial output slowed in November to an increase of only 1.4 percent, year-on-year, from a 5.3 percent rise in output in October while industrial wages were 17.1 percent higher for the first 11 months of the year.
After the release of the figures, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said wage growth without productivity increases stemmed from a lack of industrial restructuring.
"We thought it (inflation) would be lower, and what I see, aboveall, is a fundamental wage problem," he said.
"The slower restructuring in some companies...is also a source of inflation, because it is generating of inflationary money, mainly through rising wages, without a respective effect (in output)" Dlouhy added.
The government battled wage growth throughout the economy with wage controls, ended in 1995, which tied rising wages to correspnding increases in industrial output.
Pay rises in 1996, not matched by an increase in productivity, have accelerated an already large trade deficit, by sparking domestic demand which has in turn caused higher inflation and made exported goods less competitive.
Boris Gomez of ING Barings Capital Markets warned attempts to further force down inflation in 1997 may be thwarted if wage growth cannot be brought under control.
"The December CPI figure was positive since even though there a strong Christmas shopping spree by Czechs...But we still are concerned about the effects of wage growth since it will be tough for the government to cap it," he said.
Most analysts agreed that the central bank would continue its tight monetary policies at least for the first quarter of 1997, in order to keep a lid on inflationary pressures.
The Czech crown too is expected to remain stable in the short-term despite lingering problems in forcing inflation down. Traders said the crown was unaffected by December's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The crown was fixed by the cental bank on Thursday at 3.72 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +3.57 percent fixing the previous day.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech annual average consumer inflation eased slightly in 1996, pleasing analysts even though the rate overshot original government forecasts.
The Czech Statistical Bureau said on Thursday that its key sliding average inflation figure closed the year at 8.8 percent, down from 9.1 percent in 1995.
Despite missing the government's original eight percent forecast, analysts said they were optimistic the central bank's tight monetary policies were bringing inflation back under control after a first half surge.
"The final outcome on average inflation is a success because of its favourable development in the second half of the year," said Martin Kupka, economist at investment bank Patria Finance.
"Of course in the longer run, we still need to see a more rapid decrease in inflation," he told Reuters.
The Bureau said month-on-month inflation for December was 0.5 percent, unchanged from November. This put consumer prices 8.6 percent higher than the same month last year, also unchanged from November.
Bureau chairman Edvard Outrata told Reuters that 1996 core inflation remained around five percent, with government price deregulation accounting for the rest.
But 1997 inflation would depend on whether the government took further, stronger steps on freeing up energy and housing prices, he said.
Price increases in the foodstuffs, leisure and textile sectors accounted for about 80 percent of the monthly CPI rise.
Other Bureau data showed that industrial output slowed in November to an increase of only 1.4 percent year-on-year, from a 5.3 percent rise in output in October, while industrial wages were 17.1 percent higher for the first 11 months of the year.
After the release of the figures, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said wage growth without productivity increases stemmed from a lack of industrial restructuring.
"We thought it (inflation) would be lower, and what I see, above all, is a fundamental wage problem," he said.
"The slower restructuring in some companies...is also a source of inflation, because it is generating inflationary money, mainly through rising wages, without a respective effect (in output)," Dlouhy added.
The government battled wage growth throughout the economy with wage controls, ended in 1995, which tied rising wages to corresponding increases in industrial output.
Pay rises in 1996, not matched by an increase in productivity, have accelerated an already large trade deficit, by sparking domestic demand which has in turn caused higher inflation and made exported goods less competitive.
Boris Gomez of ING Barings Capital Markets said that attempts to force inflation down further in 1997 might be thwarted if wage growth could not be brought under control.
"The December CPI figure was positive even though there was a strong Christmas shopping spree by Czechs...But we still are concerned about the effects of wage growth since it will be tough for the government to cap it," he said.
Most analysts agreed that the central bank would continue its tight monetary policies at least for the first quarter of 1997 to keep a lid on inflationary pressures.
The Czech crown is expected to remain stable in the short-term despite the problems in cutting inflation. Traders said the crown was unaffected by December's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The central bank fixed the crown on Thursday at 3.72 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +3.57 percent fixing the previous day.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Prague Stock Exchange continued its strong performance in 1997, rising for the sixth consecutive session as investors turn their attention to shares of blue chip utility CEZ.
CEZ, which fell out of investor favour over the past few months, is finding fresh legs as investors, especially from abroad, consider CEZ significantly undervalued compared with other blue chip issues.
The Prague-based utility closed up 24 crowns at 1,070, to help boost the PX50 index 2.6 points, or 0.47 percent, to 560.4.
"CEZ has been very much lagging behind other blue chips...during the last three months but it's very liquid and it has a positive profit outlook for the next few years," said Radim Bajgar of ING Barings.
"For me at the moment, CEZ seems to be one of the stocks that has good potential...I think that CEZ might definitley go to 1,100...by the end of the week or maybe even today," he added.
Engineering concern Skoda also performed well, rising 32 crowns to 1,020, following comments by Director Lubomir Soudek that Skoda's gross profit should rise in 1996 to about one billion crowns after a 166 million gross loss the previous year.
He said the heavy machinery group, based in the western city of Plzen, which makes everything from trucks to tin cans and nuclear components, recorded a 40 billion crown turnover last year after 27 billion in 1995.
Skoda's core companies, which exclude joint ventures of the group, reached turnover of 28 billion crowns and exports worth 10 billion crowns.
Blue chips Komercni Banka and SPT Telecom did not fare as well, however, easing slightly on modest volumes.
In broader issues, brewer Pivovar Radegast continued to surge ahead following an announcement by Britain's Bass Plc last week that it had increased its stake in the firm to 33 percent, and was mulling the possibility of eventually merging it with Prazske Pivovary (PP).
Bass holds a majority stake in the Prague-based PP.
Overall, 190 issues gained ground on the day, while 132 fell and 55 held steady. Total volume was average at 941,202 shares on turnover of 1.144 billion crowns.
The Czech Republic recorded its first budget deficit, despite last ditch efforts by its fiscally-hawkish government to achieve its fourth consecutive surplus.
The government a final effort in December when the budget looked headed for a more than five billion crown deficit, by freezing some outlays until 1997, and requiring early repayment on credit granted to a deposit insurance fund.
But the measures were not enough and the Finance Ministry announced on Friday that definitive results show the budget ending 1996 with a deficit of 1.562 billion crowns.
Ministry spokeswoman Ludmila Nutilova said revenues for the year totalled 482.8 billion crowns, while expenditures were 484.3 billion.
The Czechs have had three year-end budget surpluses since Czechoslovakia split in 1993.
Fiannce ministry officials have said that the deficit may edge up even further since more bills may be delivered after the deadline.
The budget has been hampered continually by lower-than-expected tax revenue and delayed repayment on credits to Russia.
The 1996 budget was originally approved as a balanced budget totalling 497.6 billion crowns, but an autumn round of spending cuts knocked the forecast expenditure down to 491 billion crowns.
Parliamentary budget committee chairman Jozef Wagner, a member of the largest opposition party, the Social Democrats, said the 1996 deficit was not troublesome, but he was concerned with the effects government payment adjustments may have on the 1997 budget.
Part of the December stop-gap measures included postponing payment of 800 million crowns in state subsidies for housing loans which was due to the partially-privatised banks Ceska Sporitelna a.s. and IPB a.s.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, who calls balanced budgets the "alpha and omega" of his government, hailed initial reports of a 1996 budget surplus, made by the finance ministry soon after the new year, as a sign of the country's continued fiscal responsibility.
Parliament approved a fifth straight balanced budget plan in December, with both expenditures and revenues forecast at 549.1 billion crowns in 1997.
But the 1997 budget was based on economic growth of 5.4 percent, and many independent analysts have forecast growth for this year at under five percent, after growth between 4.0 and 4.5 percent for the whole of 1996.
Many have voiced concern that slower than expected economic growth might force the government to consider major changes in the 1997 budget to keep a much larger deficit at bay.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech Republic has recorded its first budget deficit despite last ditch efforts by the government, which has staked its reputation on fiscal responsibility, to achieve a fourth consecutive surplus.
The Finance Ministry said on Friday that definitive data showed the budget ending 1996 with a deficit of 1.56 billion Czech crowns ($57.28 million).
Modest though the budget may be by Western standards, it was the first shortfall since the Czech Republic became a sovereign nation in 1993 following the demise of Czechoslovakia.
The centre-right government made a final effort to balance the books in December when the budget seemed to be heading for a deficit of more than five billion crowns.
It postponed some spending until 1997, and required early repayment of credit granted to a deposit insurance fund.
Finance Ministry spokeswoman Ludmila Nutilova said revenues for 1996 totalled 482.8 billion crowns, while expenditures were 484.3 billion.
Ministry officials have said the deficit might edge up even further since more bills might be delivered after the deadline.
The budget has been hampered continually by lower than expected tax revenue and delayed repayment of credits to Russia.
The original 1996 budget was balanced with spending and revenue at 497.6 billion crowns, but an autumn round of cuts knocked the forecast expenditure down to 491 billion crowns.
Parliamentary budget committee chairman Jozef Wagner, a member of the opposition Social Democrats, said the 1996 deficit was not troublesome. But he was concerned about the effects that government payment adjustments might have on the 1997 budget.
Part of the December stop-gap measures included postponing payment of 800 million crowns in state subsidies for housing loans which had been due to the partially-privatised banks Ceska Sporitelna a.s. and IPB a.s.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, who calls balanced budgets the "alpha and omega" of his government, hailed initial reports of a 1996 budget surplus made by the finance ministry soon after the New Year, as a sign of continued fiscal responsibility.
Parliament approved a fifth straight balanced budget plan in December, with both expenditures and revenues forecast at 549.1 billion crowns in 1997.
But the 1997 budget was based on economic growth of 5.4 percent, and many independent analysts have forecast growth for this year at under five percent, after growth between 4.0 and 4.5 percent for the whole of 1996.
Many have voiced concern that slower than expected economic growth might force the government to consider major changes in the 1997 budget to keep a much larger deficit at bay.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=27.27 Czech Crown)
The Czech December trade deficit should rise to 16 billion crowns from 14.3 billion in the last month of 1995, ending the worst Czech trading year on another sour note, a Reuters poll of economists showed on Friday.
Czech 1996 trade figures are to be released by the Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) at 9 a.m. (0800 GMT) on Monday.
Most economists surveyed said they expect steady growth in the deficit but few surprises.
"I expect that the figures will be in-line with the development throughout 1996," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance told Reuters.
Whatever the December deficit, the full-year trade gap is guaranteed to be a record given that the January-November figure reached 140.1 billion crowns, already far beyond 1995's record total shortfall of 95.7 billion crowns.
Most analysts agreed a 15-17 billion crown December gap, after a 16.6 billion crown shortfall in November, would match prevailing trends and the concensus forecast of a 1996 deficit of 155-165 billion crowns.
The foreign exchange and money markets are expected to show little reaction over the figures -- as the worsening Czech trade balance has been long built into crown rates -- as long as the results do not vary greatly from the estimates.
Analysts say the trade balance has been hurt by a downturn in western European economies. Effects of a recovery in demand have yet to make an impact on Czech exports.
CSU figures consistently show the rate of import growth exceeding export growth, though the gap has narrowed in recent months.
Czech exporters told the CSU in a survey released earlier this month that, among other suggestions, they would want a 20 to 25 percent devalution of the crown against a mark/dollar basket to help boost lagging exports in 1997.
In comments to the CSU survey, the exporters said that if there would not be a devaluation of the still strong Czech currency, then they expect the governmnet to adopt administrative measures such as higher tariffs and surcharges to regulate imports.
The government and central bank, however, have repeatedly ruled out a devaluation of the crown to boost exports.
Analysts point to mid-1997 as a crucial time in which the import wave -- which is aimed at modernising industries -- must show results in productivity growth and competitiveness.
"There are concerns of the effect this has on the current account deficit," said one London-based economist.
"There is a question of the sustainability of the current account deficit. If you have a significantly higher figure than 15 or 16 billion crowns for December, I think people will get a little bit edgy," he added.
The current account stood at a deficit of $3.1 billion for the first three quarters of the year, in the latest available figures, spurred by the spiralling trade deficit which stood at the time at $4.1 billion.
Economists have said the current account deficit for 1996, forecast at roughly seven percent of gross domestic product, could be financed in the short to medium term through the capital account surplus and strong central bank reserves.
However, the deficit might start putting pressure on reserves in the second half of 1997.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
East European markets moved
higher across the board this week, as key foreign investors
continued to push prices higher.
Bourses in Warsaw and Budapest led the way, both hitting
year-highs, while exchanges in Romania, and Ljubljana also made
strong moves higher.
Shares in Bratislava and Prague edged up slightly, but both
are seen drifting with little upward momentum.
WARSAW
The Warsaw Stock Exchange set three consecutive 33-month
highs in heavy turnover this week, with post-fixing buying on
Thursday seen pushing them to another high on Friday. But
analysts said a profit-taking correction was likely next week.
"After today's session I believe there might be more growth
tomorrow, but I think next week investors will start taking
profits after such a surge," said Maciej Matusiak, an analyst
at PKO BP brokerage.
The bourse has risen 23 percent since December 10.
Analysts expected 16,000 points to privide strong support
for the WIG index next week.
Some said the profit-taking correction was likely to be
brief and the market could return to its uptrend later on,
possibly on growing foreign interest in Polish stocks, which
were luring new investors.
BUDAPEST
The Budapest bourse continued its bull run this week,
setting successive record highs in the first three sessions,
though profit-taking on Thursday trimmed earlier gains.
"The fact that the market is coming a little lower is to be
regarded as a normal reaction to serious price rises," one
trader said.
On Thursday the BUX index -- which has risen some 30
percent this year -- closed at 5,370.15 points, up 322.55
points on the week.
The trader said some foreign investors may reduce their
presence on the Hungarian market but there were no signs of
them leaving it completely.
"Key foreign investors are reducing their exposure on the
market but they aren't turning away from it," he said.
PRAGUE
The Prague Stock Exchange edged up this week in moderate
trading, but analysts said that while investors have been
heartened by recent talk of strengthening market oversight, it
may take several months before strong flows of money return.
The PX50 index closed on Thursday at 559.8, up 2.4 points,
or 0.43 percent, on the week.
"We're still seeing a lot of interest in funds, but some of
the other major shares are flat," said Alex Angell of Wood and
Company.
Several funds have attracted heavy investor interest after
declaring they would transform their closed-ended unit trusts
into open-ended funds, bringing about the possibility that the
shares would rise much closer to their net asset value.
The finance ministry is still creating guidelines for the
funds to open, but at least one fund manager, Harvard, has said
it plans to begin buying units from current holders in
anticipation that it would receive approval to transform.
BRATISLAVA
The Bratislava Stock Exchange (BSE) edged higher on a week
of quiet, and brokers said the market was stabilising after an
slow start to the year.
They cautioned, however, the growth was still fragile due
to generally weak investor interest. "We see there is constant
demand for only a few issues, which could stop virtually
anytime," Peter Lachkovic of Slovenska Sporitelna said.
The 12-share SAX index rose mainly on gains to oil refiner
Slovnaft, closing 189.74 points on Thursday, up 4.17 from
Monday's open at 185.57.
BUCHAREST
The bulk of Bucharest prices jogged higher this week as
bullish sentiment which has gripped the market since the start
of the year pushed prices higher for the sixth consecutive
session on Thursday sending the two indices to year-highs.
Analysts said the bull run has been fuelled by higher 1996
inflation and a depreciating leu.
LJUBLJANA
Slovenian shares jumped seven percent this week, pushed up
by foreign buying. The ten-share SBI index jumped 92.6 points
to 1,415.4.
Trader Kovinotehna was the top gainer, rising 22.2 percent,
while ordinary shares of Hipotekarna banka Brezice were the
leading decliners, falling 8.4 percent.
		  CLOSE    WEEK'S CHANGE  1996/97 HIGH 1996/97 LOW
		 JAN 23	NET    PCT
 CESI	  1,613.08   +18.21   +1.14    1,613.08     936.21
 WARSAW     15,846.7   +427.8    +2.8    15,846.7    7,725.2
 BUDAPEST    5,370.15  +322.55		5,398.52   1,557.91
 PRAGUE	  559.8     +2.4    +0.43	582.0	425.9
 BRATISLAVA    189.74    +4.17   +2.25	226.34     150.4
 BUCHAREST
 VAB-Index     334.8    +36.1   +12.0	 334.8	262.0
 BIG-Index     334.32   +36.1   +12.1	 334.32     266.43
 LJUBLJANA   1,415.4    +92.6    +7.0     1,589.18     891.93
All-time high: CESI 1,604.54 (Jan 16/1997); BUX 5,398.52
(Jan 22/1997); WIG 20,760.3 (March 8/1994); PX50 1,002.4 (April
7/1994); SBI 1,598.02 (June 28/1994); SAX 402.3
(February/1994).
The Budapest Stock Exchange hit a record high on Friday, leading a foreign-buying induced bull run through eastern Europe this week.
Markets across the region rose, led by Budapest and Warsaw, which recorded a year-high. Romania and Slovenia also moved strongly higher, while Bratislava and Prague edged up with little upward momentum.
WARSAW
The Warsaw Stock Exchange set four consecutive 33-month highs in heavy turnover this week and post-fixing buying on Friday was seen pushing them to another highs next week. Analysts said a profit-taking correction was likely later.
The bourse has risen 25 percent since December 10.
"...I think next week investors will start taking profits after such a surge," said Maciej Matusiak, an analyst at PKO BP brokerage. Analysts expected 16,000 points to provide strong support for the WIG index next week.
Some analysts said the profit-taking correction was likely to be brief and the market could return to its uptrend later on, possibly on growing foreign interest in Polish stocks, which were luring new investors.
BUDAPEST
The Budapest bourse continued its bull run this week, setting record highs in the four of the week's five sessions.
Propelled primarily by oil and gas company MOL shares, the BUX index wiped out Thursday's half percent fall, finishing the week at a record high of 5,438.35 points, up 405.49 points or 8.05 percent.
Traders said they still believe the market must endure a correction after gains of around 30 percent so far this year, but they are convinced any new downturn will be limited.
"After substantial rises, a natural correction could come but no major fall should be expected," Laszlo Baranyai of Gog Securities said. "We might move a little lower next week."
With little fresh news on the macroeconomic side, preliminary annual corporate results, to be published by February 15 could give clues to the future direction, traders said.
PRAGUE
The Prague Stock Exchange edged up this week in moderate trading. Analysts said investors have been heartened by recent talk of strengthening market oversight but it may take several months before strong flows of money return.
The PX50 index closed on Friday at 557.5, up 0.1 points, on the week. "We're still seeing a lot of interest in funds, but some of the other major shares are flat," said Alex Angell of Wood and Company.
Several funds have attracted heavy investor interest after declaring they would transform their closed-ended unit trusts into open-ended funds, making it possible that the shares would rise much closer to their net asset value.
The Finance Ministry is still creating guidelines for the funds, but at least one fund manager, Harvard, has said it plans to begin buying units from current holders in anticipation that it would receive approval to transform.
BRATISLAVA
The Bratislava Stock Exchange (BSE) edged higher in a quiet week, and brokers said the market was stabilising after a slow start to the year.
But they said the growth was still fragile due to generally weak investor interest. "There is constant demand for only a few issues, which could stop virtually any time," said Peter Lachkovic of Slovenska Sporitelna.
The 12-share SAX index rose mainly on gains to oil refiner Slovnaft, closing at 187.42 points on Friday, up 1.85 from Monday's open at 185.57.
ZAGREB
Croatian stocks were firmer with blue chips posting new records on Friday, and seen as extending their strong gains next week.
Traders said drug firm Pliva and Zagrebacka Banka -- closing at 513 and 1,870 kuna respectively -- would continue to pull the market up. But investor interest was expected to turn increasingly to hotel issues and food stocks such as Podravka, which topped its issued 300-kuna price to end at 305 kuna.
BUCHAREST
The bulk of Bucharest prices jogged higher this week as bullish sentiment which has gripped the market since the start of the year pushed stocks higher for the sixth consecutive session, sending the two indices to year-highs.
Analysts said the bull run has been fuelled by higher 1996 inflation and a depreciating leu.
LJUBLJANA
Slovenian shares jumped 11.8 percent this week, pushed up by foreign buying. The 10-share SBI index soared 156.6 points to 1,479.4.
		  CLOSE    WEEK'S CHANGE  1996/97 HIGH 1996/97 LOW
		 JAN 23	NET    PCT
 CESI	  1,626.46   +31.59   +1.98    1,626.46     936.21
 WARSAW     16,628.1   +653.5    +4.1    16,628.1    7,725.2
 BUDAPEST    5,438.35  +405.49   +8.05    5,438.35   1,557.91
 PRAGUE	  557.5     +2.4    +0.43	582.0	425.9
 BRATISLAVA    187.42    +1.85   +0.99	226.34     150.4
 BUCHAREST
 VAB-Index     334.8    +36.1   +12.0	 334.8	262.0
 BIG-Index     334.32   +36.1   +12.1	 334.32     266.43
 LJUBLJANA   1,479.4   +156.6   +11.8     1,589.18     891.93
All-time high: CESI 1,604.54 (Jan 16/1997); BUX 5,438.35 (Jan 24/1997); WIG 20,760.3 (March 8/1994); PX50 1,002.4 (April 7/1994); SBI 1,598.02 (June 28/1994); SAX 402.3 (February/1994).
The Czech December trade deficit should rise to 16 billion crowns ($575 million) from 14.3 billion in the last month of 1995, ending the worst Czech trading year on another sour note, a Reuters poll of economists showed on Friday.
Czech 1996 trade figures are to be released by the Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) at 9 a.m. (0800 GMT) on Monday.
Most economists surveyed said they expected steady growth in the deficit but few surprises. "I expect that the figures will be in line with the development throughout 1996," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance, told Reuters.
Whatever the December deficit, the full-year trade gap is guaranteed to be a record given that the January-November figure reached 140.1 billion crowns, already far beyond 1995's record total shortfall of 95.7 billion crowns.
Most analysts agreed a 15-17 billion crown December gap, after a 16.6 billion crown shortfall in November, would match prevailing trends and the consensus forecast of a 1996 deficit of 155-165 billion crowns.
The foreign exchange and money markets are expected to show little reaction to the figures -- the worsening Czech trade balance has been long built into crown rates -- as long as the results do not vary greatly from the estimates.
Analysts say the trade balance has been hurt by a downturn in western European economies. Effects of a recovery in demand have yet to help Czech exports.
CSU figures consistently show the rate of import growth exceeding export growth, although the gap has narrowed in recent months.
Czech exporters told the CSU in a survey released earlier this month that, among other suggestions, they would want a 20 to 25 percent devalution of the crown against a mark/dollar basket to help boost lagging exports in 1997.
The exporters said that if there were no devaluation of the strong Czech currency, then they expected the government to adopt administrative measures such as higher tariffs and surcharges to regulate imports.
The government and central bank, however, have repeatedly ruled out a devaluation of the crown to boost exports.
Analysts point to mid-1997 as a crucial time in which the import wave -- which is aimed at modernising industries -- must show results in productivity growth and competitiveness.
"There are concerns of the effect this has on the current account deficit," said one London-based economist.
"There is a question of the sustainability of the current account deficit. If you have a significantly higher (trade) figure than 15 or 16 billion crowns for December, I think people will get a little bit edgy," he added.
The current account ran a deficit of $3.1 billion for the first three quarters of the year, in the latest available figures, spurred by the spiralling trade deficit which stood at the time at $4.1 billion.
Economists have said the current account deficit for 1996, forecast at roughly seven percent of gross domestic product, could be financed in the short to medium term through the capital account surplus and strong central bank reserves.
However, the deficit might start putting pressure on reserves in the second half of 1997.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=27.84 Czech Crown)
East European markets moved higher across the board this week, with Poland and Hungary leading the way on foreign buying.
Warsaw and Budapest both hit year-highs, while Romania and Slovenia also moved strongly higher. Bratislava and Prague edged up, but both are seen drifting with little upward momentum.
WARSAW
The Warsaw Stock Exchange set three consecutive 33-month highs in heavy turnover this week, with post-fixing buying on Thursday seen pushing them to another high on Friday. But analysts said a profit-taking correction was likely next week.
"After today's session I believe there might be more growth tomorrow, but I think next week investors will start taking profits after such a surge," Maciej Matusiak, an analyst at PKO BP brokerage, said on Thursday.
The bourse has risen 23 percent since December 10.
Analysts expected 16,000 points to privide strong support for the WIG index next week. Some said the correction was likely to be brief and the market could return to its uptrend later, possibly on growing foreign interest in Polish stocks which was luring new investors.
BUDAPEST
The Budapest bourse continued its bull run this week, setting successive record highs in the first three sessions, although profit-taking on Thursday trimmed earlier gains.
"The fact that the market is coming a little lower is to be regarded as a normal reaction to serious price rises," one trader said.
On Thursday the BUX index, which has risen some 30 percent this year, closed at 5,370.15 points, up 322.55 on the week.
The trader said some foreign investors might reduce their presence on the Hungarian market but there were no signs of them leaving it completely.
"Key foreign investors are reducing their exposure on the market but they aren't turning away from it," he said.
PRAGUE
The Prague Stock Exchange edged up this week in moderate trading. Analysts said investors have been heartened by recent talk of strengthening market oversight but it may take several months before strong flows of money return.
The PX50 index closed on Thursday at 559.8, up 2.4 points, or 0.43 percent, on the week. "We're still seeing a lot of interest in funds, but some of the other major shares are flat," said Alex Angell of Wood and Company.
Several funds have attracted heavy investor interest after declaring they would transform their closed-ended unit trusts into open-ended funds, making it possible that the shares would rise much closer to their net asset value.
The Finance Ministry is still creating guidelines for the funds to open, but at least one fund manager, Harvard, has said it plans to begin buying units from current holders in anticipation that it would receive approval to transform.
BRATISLAVA
The Bratislava Stock Exchange (BSE) edged higher in a quiet week, and brokers said the market was stabilising after a slow start to the year.
But they said the growth was still fragile due to generally weak investor interest. "There is constant demand for only a few issues, which could stop virtually any time," said Peter Lachkovic of Slovenska Sporitelna.
The 12-share SAX index rose mainly on gains to oil refiner Slovnaft, closing at 189.74 points on Thursday, up 4.17 from Monday's open at 185.57.
BUCHAREST
The bulk of Bucharest prices jogged higher this week as bullish sentiment which has gripped the market since the start of the year pushed stocks higher for the sixth consecutive session on Thursday, sending the two indices to year-highs.
Analysts said the bull run has been fuelled by higher 1996 inflation and a depreciating leu.
LJUBLJANA
Slovenian shares jumped seven percent this week, pushed up by foreign buying. The 10-share SBI index jumped 92.6 points to 1,415.4.
Trader Kovinotehna was the top gainer, rising 22.2 percent, while ordinary shares of Hipotekarna banka Brezice were the leading decliner, falling 8.4 percent.
		  CLOSE    WEEK'S CHANGE  1996/97 HIGH 1996/97 LOW
		 JAN 23	NET    PCT
 CESI	  1,613.08   +18.21   +1.14    1,613.08     936.21
 WARSAW     15,846.7   +427.8    +2.8    15,846.7    7,725.2
 BUDAPEST    5,370.15  +322.55		5,398.52   1,557.91
 PRAGUE	  559.8     +2.4    +0.43	582.0	425.9
 BRATISLAVA    189.74    +4.17   +2.25	226.34     150.4
BUCHAREST
 VAB-Index     334.8    +36.1   +12.0	 334.8	262.0
 BIG-Index     334.32   +36.1   +12.1	 334.32     266.43
 LJUBLJANA   1,415.4    +92.6    +7.0     1,589.18     891.93
All-time high: CESI 1,604.54 (Jan 16/1997); BUX 5,398.52
(Jan 22/1997); WIG 20,760.3 (March 8/1994); PX50 1,002.4 (April
7/1994); SBI 1,598.02 (June 28/1994); SAX 402.3 (February/1994).
The often-praised Czech economy may be starting to show cracks, as slower growth highlights concern over a widening trade gap and the pace of industrial restructuring, analysts said on Monday.
Over the years, economists have hailed Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and his policies which have produced one of the lowest inflation rates in the region, good GDP growth and an unemployment rate of about three percent.
Many of those same analysts, however, are now saying that while the economy is not yet in serious trouble, much remains to be done, particularly in industrial restructuring.
The latest round of bad news came on Monday, when the Czech Statistical Bureau released figures showing the trade balance finished 1996 with a record deficit of 160.33 billion crowns, up from a 95.7 billion crown shortfall the previous year.
While most economists, after several mid-year revisions, had predicted the deficit, some are beginning to voice concerns over Czech industry's export competitiveness.
"As far as the export of our raw materials and semi-finished products are concerned, (the development) is very unfavourable over the last year," Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka said.
"We are undergrowing competition from other transforming economies. More and more we are unable to compete with some semi-finished products from Ukraine, for example, having in mind the average cost level with the Czech Republic," he added.
Since 1992 the economy has moved from recession to 4.8 percent consumption-driven real growth in 1995, as inflation fell from double digits to below nine percent.
Unemployment remains around three percent, and official statistics say nearly 70 percent of the economy is made by companies in, at least nominally, private hands.
Most Czechs are fully employed, buying truckloads of western goods, and living in state-controlled housing.
But real economic growth has begun to wane, with third quarter GDP slowing to 3.6 percent, year-on-year, from 4.0 percent growth in the second quarter.
And the spiralling trade deficit has put pressure on the current account, which showed a deficit of $3.1 billion crowns for the first three quarters according to the latest figures, while the capital account was in surplus by some $2.0 billion.
Most analysts agree that a flood of funds since the beginning of the year -- an estimated 25-30 billion crowns have entered the country in crown-denominated Eurobonds alone -- should keep the situation from deteriorating this year.
And, they add, foreign reserves are adequate.
But, said Janacek: "The problem is if in the medium-term a continuing current account deficit of about eight percent of GDP is financeable or not."
Boris Gomez of ING Barings said one problem is the lack of reliable data to chart whether the wave of imports, spurred mainly by raw material and machinery imports, will translate into economic restructuring.
He expects exports to become stronger this year as key west European markets wake up from their recent slumber, and other central European economies gain strength.
"The key period will be the end of this year when the trade deficit will have to have stabilised or there will be a lot of pressure," he said.
Added one London-based economist: "You can get all of the imports you want, but then you have to do something with them.
"There are a lot of people who talk about how this (the imports) will help down the road, but the assumption here is huge -- that management actually knows what it is doing with all of its structural advantages," he said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The often-praised Czech economy may be starting to show cracks, as slower growth highlights concern over a widening trade gap and the pace of industrial restructuring, analysts said on Monday.
Over the years, economists have hailed Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and his policies which have produced one of the lowest inflation rates in the region, good GDP growth and an unemployment rate of about three percent.
Many of those same analysts, however, are now saying that while the economy is not yet in serious trouble, much remains to be done, particularly in industrial restructuring.
The latest round of bad news came on Monday, when the Czech Statistical Bureau released figures showing the trade balance finished 1996 with a record deficit of 160.33 billion crowns ($5.75 billion), up from a 95.7 billion crown shortfall the previous year.
While most economists, after several mid-year revisions, had predicted the deficit, some are beginning to voice concerns over Czech industry's export competitiveness.
"As far as the export of our raw materials and semi-finished products are concerned, (the development) is very unfavourable over the last year," Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka said.
"We are undergrowing competition from other transforming economies. More and more we are unable to compete with some semi-finished products from Ukraine, for example, having in mind the average cost level with the Czech Republic," he added.
Since 1992 the economy has moved from recession to 4.8 percent consumption-driven real growth in 1995, as inflation fell from double digits to below nine percent.
Unemployment remains around three percent, and official statistics say nearly 70 percent of the economy is made by companies in, at least nominally, private hands.
Most Czechs are fully employed, buying truckloads of western goods, and living in state-controlled housing.
But real economic growth has begun to wane, with third quarter GDP slowing to 3.6 percent, year-on-year, from 4.0 percent growth in the second quarter.
And the spiralling trade deficit has put pressure on the current account, which showed a deficit of $3.1 billion crowns for the first three quarters according to the latest figures, while the capital account was in surplus by some $2.0 billion.
Most analysts agree that a flood of funds since the beginning of the year -- an estimated 25-30 billion crowns have entered the country in crown-denominated Eurobonds alone -- should keep the situation from deteriorating this year.
And, they add, foreign reserves are adequate.
But, said Janacek: "The problem is if in the medium-term a continuing current account deficit of about eight percent of GDP is financeable or not."
Boris Gomez of ING Barings said one problem is the lack of reliable data to chart whether the wave of imports, spurred mainly by raw material and machinery imports, will translate into economic restructuring.
He expects exports to become stronger this year as key west European markets wake up from their recent slumber, and other central European economies gain strength.
"The key period will be the end of this year when the trade deficit will have to have stabilised or there will be a lot of pressure," he said.
Added one London-based economist: "You can get all of the imports you want, but then you have to do something with them.
"There are a lot of people who talk about how this (the imports) will help down the road, but the assumption here is huge -- that management actually knows what it is doing with all of its structural advantages," he said.
($1=27.86 Czech Crown)
The Czech trade deficit for December widened beyond forecasts, but analysts said the crown should hold steady on Monday despite some nervous moments immediately after the figures were released.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said the trade deficit for December hit 18.0 billion crowns ($650 million), putting the full year 1996 shortfall at a record 160.33 billion crowns.
A Reuters survey of economists had forecast a December deficit of about 16 billion crowns, following a 14.3 billion crown trade gap for the same month in the previous year. The overall 1995 deficit was 95.7 billion crowns.
The CSU said in a statement that imports for 1996, spurred by constant growth of machinery imports, totalled 755.3 billion crowns, a year-on-year rise of 12.7 percent.
Meanwhile, the CSU said exports faltered, hampered in part by a downturn in western European economies and a strengthening crown, rising only 3.5 percent year-on-year to total 594.95 billion crowns in 1996.
The CSU added that machinery imports alone for the year hit 288.5 billion crowns, an increase of 16.1 percent over 1995.
Raw materials, unprocessed goods and chemical products imports also showed strong growth, totalling 327.9 billion crowns, a 10.2 percent year-on-year increase.
The same sector also dominated exports, reaching 280.6 billion crowns. But the CSU said exports in this area contracted by some 4.2 percent year-on-year.
Despite the poorer than expected result for December, analysts said the overall figure should have little impact on the crown after some nervous moments in early Monday trading.
"It's quite nervous, spreads are wide...(but) bad figures were expected and the figures are not seasonally adjusted," said Petr Tomek of Zivnostenska Banka.
The crown dipped to around 27.888 against the dollar and 17.057 against the mark implying +4.07 percent against its mark/dollar basket mid-point immediately after the figures were released, but it subsequently recovered to around +4.2 percent.
The crown was fixed on Friday by the central bank at 4.4 percent above the basket mid-point. ($1=27.84 Czech Crown)
The United States on Tuesday upped the ante in the battle to supply NATO aspirants in central Europe with advanced fighter aircraft, by offering the Czechs free use of seven Navy Hornet aircraft for five years.
Representatives of the U.S. Navy, on behalf of the U.S. Government offered to lease the Czech Republic seven McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 "Hornet" fighter planes under a no-cost, five-year agreement, McDonnell Douglas said in a statement.
"The offer (to the Czech government) is for the no-cost, five-year leasing of six single-seat F/A-18A and one two-seat F/A-18B aircraft," said the statement, issued by the Prague representative of McDonnell Douglas Corp .
The offer included the supply, at cost, of replacement parts, pilot and ground personnel training programmes and support equipment.
Also competing for post-Cold War business in central Europe are U.S. Lockheed Martin , which makes F-16's primarily for the U.S. airforce, the Anglo-Swedish consortium of SAAB and British Aerospace , which makes the "Gripen", and France's Dassault Aviation makers of the "Mirage".
It was not yet clear whether the aircraft in the U.S. offer would be used or new, and the Prague spokesman for McDonnell Douglas was not immediately available for further comment.
"Supply and service costs will be the subject of further discussions," the statement said.
Czech pilots could begin training in the planes in six months, with delivery of the aircraft 18 months after the contract is signed, the statement said.
To strengthen its bid, McDonnell Douglas also said that it is preparing to locate production of components for the Hornet at Czech light jet maker Aero Vodochody a.s. "regardless of whether new or leased aircraft are chosen to re-equip the Czech Air Force".
Cooperation could also include Czech engineering concern Skoda a.s. , it added.
The Czech government, seeking to prepare for eventual membership in NATO, has been debating decisions on buying any aircraft as proposed cuts in defence spending have clouded the debate over the upgrading of the fleet.
The Czechs, along with Poland and Hungary, are seen as leading candidates for early NATO membership, when the western security alliance expands.
Czech defence officials have said they have the will but not the wallet to buy brand new western-made advanced fighters, but are keeping their options open as a battle over the long-term military budget goes on.
They have said they would need about 24 fighters to replace their ageing Soviet made MiG-21s to be more compatible with NATO, but at more than $20 million per fighter, new western planes are too pricey.
The United States on Tuesday raised the stakes in a battle to supply NATO aspirants in central Europe with advanced fighter aircraft by offering the Czechs free use of seven Navy Hornet jets for five years.
Representatives of the U.S. Navy, on behalf of the U.S. government, offered to lease the Czech Republic seven McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 "Hornet" fighter planes under a no-cost, five-year agreement, McDonnell Douglas Corp.said.
Czech officials reacted warmly to the offer, saying the support of the U.S. government was welcome, but that it did not guarantee success for the bid.
"We welcome the U.S. government's support but we will look at all bids. We have experts who will examine all of them and investigate which is the best," said Petr Necas, chairman of the parliamentary defence committee after a meeting with U.S. Navy vice-admiral John Allen Lockard.
On offer are six single-seat F/A-18A and one two-seat F/A-18B aircraft currently used by the U.S. Navy.
The offer also includes the supply, at cost, of replacement parts, pilot and ground personnel training programmes and support equipment. "Supply and service costs will be the subject of further discussions," a company statement said.
"The advantage of the lease is that it allows the Czechs to quickly obtain the Hornets, and they would gain almost immediate operational and maintenance experience with these aircraft," McDonnell Douglas spokeswoman Barbara Anderson told Reuters.
"As opposed to purchasing, they can take that experience and then make a more sound purchase decision later," she added.
Also competing for post-Cold War business in central Europe are U.S. Lockheed Martin, which makes F-16s primarily for the U.S. Air Force, the Anglo-Swedish consortium of SAAB and British Aerospace,, which makes the Gripen, and France's Dassault Aviation makers of the Mirage.
Necas expressed disappointment that governments from other competing countries had failed to step forward formally to lend their support, saying it appeared the U.S. was far more active in the pursuit of a contract.
"I have to say that it's too bad for the Czech side that the activity of the French, Swedish or British governments from the perspective of cooperating (with their companies)...isn't comparable with that of the U.S.," he said.
The Czech government, seeking to prepare for eventual membership in NATO, has been debating whether to buy any aircraft as proposed cuts in defence spending have clouded the debate over the upgrading of the fleet.
The Czechs, along with Poland and Hungary, are seen as leading candidates for early NATO membership, when the western security alliance expands.
Czech defence officials have said they have the will but not the wallet to buy brand new Western-made advanced fighters, but are keeping their options open as a battle over the long-term military budget goes on.
They have said they would need about 24 fighters to replace their ageing Soviet made MiG-21s to be more compatible with NATO, but at more than $20 million per fighter, new western planes are too pricey.
Czech pilots could begin training in the planes in six months, with delivery of the aircraft 18 months after the contract is signed, the statement said.
To strengthen its bid, McDonnell Douglas also said that it is preparing to locate component production for the Hornet at Czech Aero Vodochody a.s. regardless of whether new or leased aircraft are chosen to re-equip the Czech Air Force.
Cooperation could also include Czech engineering concern Skoda a.s., the firm added.
The United States on Tuesday raised the stakes in a battle to supply NATO aspirants in central Europe with advanced fighter aircraft by offering the Czechs free use of seven Navy Hornet aircraft for five years.
Representatives of the U.S. Navy on behalf of the U.S. government offered to lease the Czech Republic seven McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 "Hornet" fighter planes under a no-cost, five-year agreement, McDonnell Douglas said in a statement.
"The offer (to the Czech government) is for the no-cost, five-year leasing of six single-seat F/A-18A and one two-seat F/A-18B aircraft," said the statement, issued by the Prague representative of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
The offer included the supply, at cost, of replacement parts, pilot and ground personnel training programmes and support equipment.
Also competing for post-Cold War business in central Europe are U.S. Lockheed Martin, which makes F-16's primarily for the U.S. airforce, the Anglo-Swedish consortium of SAAB and British Aerospace, which makes the "Gripen", and France's Dassault Aviation makers of the "Mirage".
The Czech government, seeking to prepare for eventual membership in NATO, has been debating decisions on buying any aircraft as proposed cuts in defence spending have clouded the debate over the upgrading of the fleet.
The Czechs, along with Poland and Hungary, are seen as leading candidates for early NATO membership, when the western security alliance expands.
Czech defence officials have said they have the will but not the wallet to buy brand new western-made advanced fighters, but are keeping their options open as a battle over the long-term military budget goes on.
They have said they would need about 24 fighters to replace their ageing Soviet made MiG-21s to be more compatible with NATO, but at more than $20 million per fighter, new western planes are too pricey.
It was not yet clear whether the aircraft in the U.S. offer would be used or new, and the Prague spokesman for McDonnell Douglas was not immediately available for further comment.
"Supply and service costs will be the subject of further discussions," the statement said.
Czech pilots could begin training in the planes in six months, with delivery of the aircraft 18 months after the contract is signed, the statement said.
To strengthen its bid, McDonnell Douglas also said that it is preparing to locate production of components for the Hornet at Czech light jet maker Aero Vodochody a.s. "regardless of whether new or leased aircraft are chosen to re-equip the Czech Air Force".
Cooperation could also include Czech engineering concern Skoda a.s., it added.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday issued forecasts for 1997 predicting a slight economic upturn, but analysts warned burgeoning trade and current account deficits are clouds looming on the horizon.
After a sluggish 1996, the CSU said it expects real GDP growth for 1997 of 4.0-5.0 percent following an estimated 4.1 percent growth rate for 1996 while average annual inflation should ease to 7.5-8.0 percent from 8.8 percent.
The CSU added in its wide range of forecasts that the current account deficit, spurred by a spiralling trade gap, should grow to 137-145 billion crowns from an estimated 110.6 billion crown shortfall in 1996.
Analysts said the figures were more or less in line with expectations, but warned widening current account and trade deficits -- both seen growing to record numbers in 1997 -- could undermine the economy.
"I think they are credible forecasts, but not very encouraging," David Lubin, an economist at HSBC Midland told Reuters.
"It's okay for a country to run a current account deficit of nine percent of GDP but only if you believe in the future the economy will generate trade surpluses big enough to repay the debt that's being accumulated to finance the deficits."
According to the CSU estimates, the current account shortfall should be between 8.6-9.1 percent of GDP in 1997. It forecast the trade deficit to widen to 202-212 billion crowns from a deficit of 160.3 billion crowns last year.
At the heart of the trade gap was a 12.7 percent rise in imports in 1996, due in large part to firms investing in new machinery and materials, badly-needed as part of the country's economic restructuring.
Meanwhile exports stagnated, rising only 3.5 percent for the year. But the CSU said it expects exports to grow 4.5-6.5 percent in 1997, while import growth should ease slightly to 9-12 percent.
"Some improvement (in imports) can only be expected in the second half of 1997 due to the influence of investment into new technologies and some pro-export measures," the CSU said.
But analysts say it is still too soon to know if the vast imports of machinery and materials in 1996 will be properly put to use, and whether managers can make this newly-acquired capital translate into a more competitive industrial sector and cover the deficit currently being run up.
"I'm not sure that the Czech economy is making sufficient progress at the corporate level, the micro-economic level, to generate those trade surpluses," said one local economist.
"It seems to me that the Czech economy still has a sort of fundamental competitiveness problem," he added.
After fighting through a recent downturn, the Czech Republic's largest trading partner, Germany, appears poised to make a recovery in 1997. Government officials have often said that this should help bolster sagging Czech exports.
But if the German economy does warm up, the Bundesbank may raise interset rates to keep it from overheating, attracting a flood of funds that has entered the Czech Republic bolstering its capital account.
"What they gain on the current account on the balance of payments from the German upturn, they might lose somewhat on the capital account," Lubins said.
The CSU said growth in average nominal wages -- a factor the central bank has warned must be brought under control if inflation targets are to be met -- is expected to be 14.5-16.5 percent, down from the 1996 forecast increase of 18.4 percent.
Some analysts, however, said the drop may not be enough to stem inflationary pressures.
"This (wage growth) is much more than this economy can afford -- maybe around 12 percent is acceptable," said Vladimir Kriedl, an economist at Patria Finance.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) issued forecasts for 1997 on Monday predicting a slight economic upturn, but analysts issued warnings about the rapidly growing trade and current account deficits.
After a sluggish 1996, the CSU said it expected real gross domestic product (GDP) growth for 1997 of 4.0-5.0 percent following an estimated 4.1 percent in 1996. Average annual inflation should ease to 7.5-8.0 percent from 8.8 percent, it forecast.
The CSU added in its wide range of forecasts that the current account deficit, spurred by a spiralling trade gap, should grow to 137-145 billion crowns from an estimated 110.6 billion crown ($4 billion) shortfall in 1996.
Analysts said the figures were more or less in line with expectations, but said that the widening current account and trade deficits -- both seen growing to record levels in 1997 -- could undermine the economy.
"I think they are credible forecasts, but not very encouraging," said David Lubin, an economist at HSBC Midland.
"It's okay for a country to run a current account deficit of nine percent of GDP but only if you believe in the future the economy will generate trade surpluses big enough to repay the debt that's being accumulated to finance the deficits," he told Reuters.
According to the CSU estimates, the current account shortfall should be 8.6-9.1 percent of GDP in 1997. It forecast the trade deficit would widen to 202-212 billion crowns from a deficit of 160.3 billion last year.
At the heart of the trade gap was a 12.7 percent rise in imports in 1996, due largely to firms investing in new machinery and materials which are badly needed for post-communist economic restructuring.
Exports stagnated, rising only 3.5 percent for the year. But the CSU said it expected them to grow 4.5-6.5 percent in 1997, while import growth should ease slightly to 9-12 percent.
"Some improvement (in imports) can be expected only in the second half of 1997 due to the influence of investment in new technologies and some pro-export measures," the CSU said.
But analysts say it is still too soon to know if the vast imports of machinery and materials in 1996 will be properly put to use, and whether managers can make their new capital goods translate into a more competitive industrial sector and cover the deficit currently being run up.
"I'm not sure that the Czech economy is making sufficient progress at the corporate level, the micro-economic level, to generate those trade surpluses," said one local economist.
"It seems to me that the Czech economy still has a sort of fundamental competitiveness problem," he added.
After fighting through a recent downturn, the Czech Republic's largest trading partner, Germany, appears poised to make a recovery in 1997. Government officials have often said that this should help sagging Czech exports.
But if the German economy does warm up, the Bundesbank may raise interest rates to keep it from overheating, attracting back funds which have flooded into the Czech Republic and bolstered its capital account.
"What they gain on the current account on the balance of payments from the German upturn, they might lose somewhat on the capital account," Lubins said.
The CSU said growth in average nominal wages -- a factor the central bank has said must be brought under control if inflation targets are to be met -- is expected to be 14.5-16.5 percent, down from the 1996 forecast increase of 18.4 percent.
Some analysts, however, said the drop might not be enough to stem inflationary pressures.
"This (wage growth) is much more than this economy can afford -- maybe around 12 percent is acceptable," said Vladimir Kriedl, an economist at Patria Finance.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($ = 27.65 Czech Crowns)
The Czech crown, boosted recently by demand brought about by a wave of Eurobond issues, is showing no sign of losing strength, prompting market speculation on Wednesday of possible central bank intervention.
The Czech National Bank (CNB) has said it is monitoring the development of the crown, but is prepared to allow the market to decide its rate within the fluctuation band.
Since the start of 1997 the currency has gained some three percentage points against its fixing basket, mainly on foreign buying to finance a wave of some 30 billion crowns ($1.1 billion) in new crown Eurobond issues.
Analysts said that while the crown may hold steady over the next day or two, it should again test 5.5 percent above its parity level next week.
"I don't expect much of a move higher this week, but next week the crown could again test +5.5 percent," said Martin Strauch, a dealer at Citibank.
Jakub Perina of Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka added: "A lot depends on London traders because they are very interested right now."
The Czech crown is fixed daily at up to plus or minus 7.5 percent of the mid-point of a basket comprising 35 percent dollars and 65 percent marks.
On Wednesday, the Czech National Bank (CNB) fixed the crown at 27.712 to the dollar and 16.846 to the mark, putting the currency 5.05 percent above the mid-point.
"If the crown does not exceed its fluctuation band, the central bank will not intervene," CNB Spokesman Martin Svehla told the econoimc daily Hospodarske Noviny on Wednesday.
Last February the CNB widened the corridor within which it fixes the crown each day to plus or minus 7.5 percent of parity, from plus/minus 0.5 percent.
Since then the foreign exchange market, and not the central bank, has been much more of a force in determining the crown's rate within this controlled float.
Several dealers, however, confirmed to Reuters that the CNB had contacted them on Tuesday when the crown hit 5.3 percent above parity, and said they took the move as a signal that intervention was possible whn the currency hit plus 6.0 percent.
"The market was a little spooked by this move, and the crown fell immediately," said one London-based analyst. "But it regained its strength today, and I think many people now expect some intervention if it moves much higher."
CSOB's Strauch said: "They (the CNB) could be ready to intervene at some point, possibly +6.0 percent, but it depends on whether it appears to have strength to move even higher at that point."
The main underlying reason for foreign interest in the Czech crown is the large interest rate differential between the Czech Republic and western countries.
In the middle of 1996 the CNB raised the discount rate to 10.5 percent from 9.5 percent and increased minimum reserve requirements on primary deposits to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent. Interbank money market rates up to three months hover around 12.5 percent.
Though interbank market rates eased some 60 basis points, or 0.6 percentage points, in January, the central bank and government officials have both expressed reluctance to officially lower rates because of strong demand for money and investments.
Analysts said rates are still high enough, howeer, to continue attracting large inflows of capital.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($ = 27.68 Czech Crowns)
The Prague Stock Exchange, boosted by strong blue chip gains, hit a year-high on Thursday, but analysts said any strong bullish sentiment was tempered by a lack of liquidity and low foreign investor interest.
At the heart of the bourse's rise has been a resurgence of the market's two most-capitalised issues -- SPT Telecom and CEZ -- which account for over one-third of the PX50 index.
Both hits 52-week highs to push the index 1.93 percent higher to 591.3, but analysts cautioned that the market was still plagued by a lack of liquidity, which was distorting price movements.
"Volumes are very thin, when you come to the market looking for a bigger parcel of shares it doesn't take much interest to move the prices. But the truth is, not a lot of foreign money is flowing in," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, jumped 169 crowns to 3,744, while CEZ, which accounts for 14 percent, rose 51 crowns to 1,210.
Dealers said they did not see any fundamental reasons for SPT shares to rise much further, but that CEZ could climb slightly higher since it lagged other blue chips during last year's mid-summer rally.
The PSE has recently showed signs of life after a fourth quarter 1996 slump took 25 percent off the index after a lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency undermined the market.
The index has gained 9.6 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and bourse officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Though it may not be a panacea to the market woes, most analysts agree that the oversight commission could be the most important step the PSE could take in 1997.
"Foreign investors have definitely been heartened by official movement on cleaning up the market," said one foreign broker.
"The market will probably edge up slightly with such low liquidity. Hopefully when 1996 earnings begin to come in the bourse will have a new impetus," he added. Company results are expected to begin flowing in at the beginning of March.
Factors outside the bourse floor are also contributing to the market's rise.
Radek Vavra of Citicorp Securities in Prague said that given the current strength of the currency, the crown, and several other technical factors, the market should continue firming.
He added that he was seeing strong foreign investor interest, giving the rally potential "to continue over the next week before it levels off in two to three weeks".
The crown has gained some three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
In late afternoon trading on Thursday the crown was 5.16 percent above its basket mid-point, upslightly from the central bank's daily fixing at +5.12 percent.
The Prague Stock Exchange, boosted by strong blue chip gains, hit a year-high on Thursday, but analysts said any strong bullish sentiment was tempered by a lack of liquidity and low foreign investor interest.
At the heart of the bourse's rise has been a resurgence of the market's two most-capitalised issues -- SPT Telecom and CEZ -- which account for over one-third of the PX50 index.
Both hits 52-week highs at the daily price fixing on Thursday to push the index 1.1 percent higher to 586.5, but analysts cautioned that the market was still plagued by a lack of liquidity, which was distorting price movements.
"Volumes are very thin, when you come to the market looking for a bigger parcel of shares it doesn't take much interest to move the prices. But the truth is, not a lot of foreign money is flowing in," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, jumped 85 crowns to 3,660, while CEZ, which account for 14 percent, rose 34 crowns to 1,193.
Dealers said they did not see any fundamental reasons for SPT shares to rise much further, but that CEZ could climb another two or three percent.
The PSE has recently showed signs of life after a fourth quarter 1996 slump took 25 percent off the index after a lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency undermined the market.
The index has gained a modest 8.7 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and bourse officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Though it may not be a panacea to the market woes, most analysts agree that the oversight commission could be the most important step the PSE could take in 1997.
"Foreign investors have definitely been heartened by official movement on cleaning up the market," said one foreign broker.
"The market will probably edge up slightly with such low liquidity. Hopefully when 1996 earnings begin to come in the bourse will have a new impetus," he added. Company results are expected to begin flowing in at the beginning of March.
Factors outside the bourse floor are also contributing to the market's rise.
Radek Vavra of Citicorp Securities in Prague said that given the current strength of the currency, the crown, and several other technical factors, the market should continue firming.
He added that he was seeing strong foreign investor interest, giving the rally potential "to continue over the next week before it levels off in two to three weeks".
The crown has gained some three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
At midday on Thursday it was trading at 5.16 percent above its basket mid-point, upslightly from the central bank's daily fixing at +5.12 percent.
The Czech Republic took both reverse singles matches from India on Sunday clinching a berth in the second round of the Davis Cup, but lost its number one player, Petr Korda in the process.
Jiri Novak gave the Czechs a 3-2 victory with a straight set 6-1 6-4 6-3 victory over Mahesh Bhupathi after Korda, who announced he was retiring from Davis Cup play, had brought his team level with a 5-7 6-3 6-4 6-1 win over Leander Paes.
Novak barely broke a sweat against Bhupathi, who is ranked more than 400 places lower, needing just 90 minutes to dispatch the Indian number two.
Jumping out to a quick start, Novak, ranked 67th in the world, took the first set 6-1 and went up 5-0 in the second before losing his rythmn, and four consecutive games. But he regrouped to hold serve in the tenth game for the set.
He then broke Bhupathi twice in the third set to clinch the tie. "This is one of the biggest matches I have won in my life," said an elated Novak following the match.
Korda, ranked 33rd in the world, also had little trouble in his matchup with Paes, overpowering the Indian at the net and unleashing powerful groundstrokes from the baseline.
He squandered five break points in the first set, while Paes, ranked 105th in the world, took advantage of the only one he had to take the first set in 53 minutes.
But Korda showed no signs of a cold that has plagued him throughout the week, quickly getting back on track to take the next three sets.
"Overall though, I am still really happy both myself and the team performed," said Olympic bronze medalist Paes.
After the win, Korda said he would no longer play for the Czechs in the Davis Cup, complaining of the demands it put on a player.
"There was a lot of pressure on me for this match, but I showed the kind of player I am," he said.
"I have thought about retiring (from Davis Cup) for a while and it's time to leave. It is a very tiring, draining experience and I think you should leave at the top. Now is the right time."
Korda, who was once ranked as high as fifth in the world, has been the anchor of the Czech team since his debut in 1988, compiling a 30-12 overall record, including three wins against India this weekend.
The loss of Korda is the second setback for last year's semifinalists, after Czech number two Daniel Vacek bowed out of action to concentrate more on his performance on the ATP tour.
The Prague Stock Exchange, as expected, backed off last week's year-high on a round of profit taking on Monday, but analysts said market sentiment remains bullish for the coming weeks.
After a strong rise last week, market heavyweights SPT Telecom, CEZ and Komercni Banka, which combined account for over one-half of the PX50 index, all fell sharply to drag the index down 0.28 percent to 598.0.
"The market has corrected a little bit, but there seems to be good support at this level," Marco Anderegg of Patria Finance told Reuters.
"Foreign investor interest remains solid and towards the end of last week broader issues were gaining interest so it looks solid for a lot of the market," he added.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, closed down 75 crowns at 3,700, while CEZ, which accounts for 14 percent, was off 28 crowns to 1,202 and Komercni, with market cap of 11 percent, lost 25 crowns to 2,620.
"We saw some of the blue chips such as Komercni and SPT rebound in late deals, which could show that the market's weakness will be short-lived. I expect to see prices begin rising again soon," said one local trader.
The PSE has since a steady uptrend in 1997 after a fourth quarter 1996 slump took 25 percent off the index after a lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency undermined the market.
The index has gained 9.7 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Bram Buring of Brno Broker Group said the correction could last for several weeks as lower-than-expected company results begin to flood in, possibly taking as much as five percent from the index before it rebounds.
But, he added: "Foreign investors are definitely interested and kicking starting the market...and we expect that to continue on but things have overheated a little at the moment."
Analysts added that the recent strong performance of the crown should also boost the equities market since investors are shielded from wide currency fluctuations.
The crown has gained over three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
In late afternoon trading on Monday it was holding steady at 5.32 percent above its basket mid-point, up slightly from the central bank's daily fixing at +5.28 percent. The crown was fixed on Friday at 5.23 percent.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech consumer inflation continued its gradual downtrend in January, but analysts said they do not expect a loosening of the central bank's tight monetary policy in the short-term.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said January inflation, month-on-month, was 1.2 percent, putting the year-on-year rate at 7.4 percent, down from 8.6 percent the previous month.
The key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, edged down to 8.7 percent from 8.8 percent in December, and was down from 9.1 percent in January 1996.
"The January number is very good, about one percentage point lower than a year ago," Kamil Janacek, cheif economist at Komercni Banka told Reuters.
"If prices and some deregulations develop accoridng to plan in the next months, and thanks to producer prices being under five percent...there is a high probability that 1997 inflation could end at around, or just under, eight percent," he added.
The CSU said in a report that the biggest influences on the January inflation rate were food, drinks and tobacco products which rose 1.3 percent in the month, transportation which rose 3.6 percent and housing which rose by 1.3 percent.
It added that of the 1.2 percent month-on-month rate, seasonal influences accounted for 0.23 percent, putting the seasonally-adjusted monthly rate at 0.97 percent.
CSU figures show price deregulation influenced the seasonally-adjusted rate by 0.63 percent, while seasonally-adjusted core inflation was 0.34 percent.
Despite the downtrend, most analysts agreed that there seems little chance the Czech National Bank (CNB), the central bank, will ease its tight monetary policy in the near future despite the sustained downtrend in CPI.
Curbing inflation has been at the heart of almost all of the CNB's policies, and both CNB and government officials have said they expect rates to remain high, at least over the near term.
"The month-on-month rate appears favourable," Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings, said.
"While there may be some room for it, I doubt the central bank will lower rates immediately -- maybe in the second quarter at the earliest," he added.
Last summer the CNB raised its key discount rate one percentage point to 10.5 percent, and hiked minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent of deposits to squeeze off surging domestic demand.
The moves have appeared to signficantly slow growth in the money supply, which is now at the lower end of the central bank's 13 to 17 percent growth target.
But central bank officials have warned that wage growth -- which was up 21.2 percent in nominal terms in December according to preliminary figures -- and its influence on inflation is a growing concern.
"The government has to somehow limit wage growth. It's just too high and this must be addressed before the central bank will move rates," said one London-based economist.
Foreign exchange traders said the crown was unaffected by January's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The crown was fixed by the central bank on Monday at 5.28 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +5.14 percent fixing from last Friday.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Prague Stock Exchange slipped on Monday from last week's year high on a round of profit taking, but analysts said sentiment remains bullish for the coming weeks.
After a strong rise last week, market heavyweights SPT Telecom, CEZ and Komercni Banka, which together account for almost half of the PX50 index, all fell to drag the index down 0.77 percent to 595.1 points.
"The market has corrected a little bit, but there seems to be good support at this level," Marco Anderegg of Patria Finance told Reuters.
"Foreign investor interest remains solid and towards the end of last week broader issues were gaining interest so it looks solid for a lot of the market," he added.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, closed down 75 crowns at 3,700, while power company CEZ, which accounts for 14 percent, was off 28 crowns to 1,202 and commercial bank Komercni (11 percent) lost 25 crowns to 2,620.
"We saw some of the blue chips such as Komercni and SPT rebound in late deals, which could show that the market's weakness will be short-lived. I expect to see prices begin rising again soon," said one local trader.
The PSE has been climbing steadily since a slump in the fourth quarter 1996 took 25 percent off the index. Analysts blamed a lack of government commitment to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency for the dive.
The index has gained nearly 10 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Bram Buring of Brno Broker Group said the correction could last for several weeks as lower than expected company results began to flood in, possibly taking as much as five percent from the index before it rebounds.
But he added: "Foreign investors are definitely interested and kick starting the market...We expect that to continue but things have overheated a little at the moment."
Analysts added that the recent strong performance of the crown should also boost the equities market since investors are shielded from wide currency fluctuations.
The crown has gained over three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
In late afternoon trading on Monday it was holding steady at 5.32 percent above its basket mid-point, up slightly from the central bank's daily fixing at 5.28 percent over the mid-point. The crown was fixed on Friday at 5.23 percent above the mid-point.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech consumer inflation continued its gradual downtrend in January, but analysts said they do not expect a loosening of the central bank's tight monetary policy in the short-term.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said January inflation, month-on-month, was 1.2 percent, putting the year-on-year rate at 7.4 percent, down from 8.6 percent the previous month.
The key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, edged down to 8.7 percent from 8.8 percent in December, and was down from 9.1 percent in January 1996.
"The January number is very good, about one percentage point lower than a year ago," Kamil Janacek, cheif economist at Komercni Banka told Reuters.
"If prices and some deregulations develop according to plan in the next months, and thanks to producer prices being under five percent...there is a high probability that 1997 inflation could end at around, or just under, eight percent," he added.
The CSU said in a report that the biggest influences on the January inflation rate were food, drinks and tobacco products which rose 1.3 percent in the month, transportation which rose 3.6 percent and housing which rose by 1.3 percent.
It added that of the 1.2 percent month-on-month rate, seasonal influences accounted for 0.23 percent, putting the seasonally-adjusted monthly rate at 0.97 percent.
CSU figures show price deregulation influenced the seasonally-adjusted rate by 0.63 percent, while seasonally-adjusted core inflation was 0.34 percent.
Despite the downtrend, most analysts agreed that there seems little chance the Czech National Bank (CNB), the central bank, will ease its tight monetary policy in the near future despite the sustained downtrend in CPI.
Curbing inflation has been at the heart of almost all of the CNB's policies, and both CNB and government officials have said they expect rates to remain high, at least over the near term.
"The month-on-month rate appears favourable," Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings, said.
"While there may be some room for it, I doubt the central bank will lower rates immediately -- maybe in the second quarter at the earliest," he added.
Last summer the CNB raised its key discount rate one percentage point to 10.5 percent, and hiked minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent of deposits to squeeze off surging domestic demand.
The moves have appeared to signficantly slow growth in the money supply, which is now at the lower end of the central bank's 13 to 17 percent growth target.
But central bank officials have warned that wage growth -- which was up 21.2 percent in nominal terms in December according to preliminary figures -- and its influence on inflation is a growing concern.
"The government has to somehow limit wage growth. It's just too high and this must be addressed before the central bank will move rates," said one London-based economist.
Foreign exchange traders said the crown was unaffected by January's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The crown was fixed by the central bank on Monday at 5.28 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +5.14 percent fixing from last Friday.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Prague Stock Exchange slipped on Monday from last week's year high on a round of profit taking, but analysts said sentiment remains bullish for the coming weeks.
After a strong rise last week, market heavyweights SPT Telecom, CEZ and Komercni Banka, which together account for almost half of the PX50 index, all fell sharply to drag the index down 0.28 percent to 598.0 points.
"The market has corrected a little bit, but there seems to be good support at this level," Marco Anderegg of Patria Finance told Reuters.
"Foreign investor interest remains solid and towards the end of last week broader issues were gaining interest so it looks solid for a lot of the market," he added.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, closed down 75 crowns at 3,700, while power company CEZ, which accounts for 14 percent, was off 28 crowns to 1,202 and commercial bank Komercni (11 percent) lost 25 crowns to 2,620.
"We saw some of the blue chips such as Komercni and SPT rebound in late deals, which could show that the market's weakness will be short-lived. I expect to see prices begin rising again soon," said one local trader.
The PSE has been climbing steadily since a slump in the fourth quarter 1996 took 25 percent off the index. Analysts blamed a lack of government commitment to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency for the dive.
The index has gained 9.7 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Bram Buring of Brno Broker Group said the correction could last for several weeks as lower than expected company results began to flood in, possibly taking as much as five percent from the index before it rebounds.
But he added: "Foreign investors are definitely interested and kick starting the market...We expect that to continue but things have overheated a little at the moment."
Analysts added that the recent strong performance of the crown should also boost the equities market since investors are shielded from wide currency fluctuations.
The crown has gained over three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
In late afternoon trading on Monday it was holding steady at 5.32 percent above its basket mid-point, up slightly from the central bank's daily fixing at 5.28 percent over the mid-point. The crown was fixed on Friday at 5.23 percent above the mid-point.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
A wave of high-yielding Czech crown Eurobonds that has flooded the debt market since the beginning of the year has begun to ebb, as interest rates ease and arbitrage opportunities decline, analysts said on Tuesday.
"The Euro-madness is definitely over. We may see a couple more issues but those will be mainly by issuers who are active in the Czech Republic," Ota Otepka, chief bond trader at ING Barings, told Reuters.
Since the start of the year, issuers have rushed to take advantage of a stable, strong currency and interest rates above 11 percent, flooding the market with nearly 30 billion crowns ($1.1 billion) worth of Eurobonds in just over four weeks.
Dealers said that with interest rates so high, and a crown that is 65 percent linked to the mark but yielding seven to eight percentage points above it, the appetite for crown Eurobonds had appeared insatiable.
But interest rates have eased some 60-70 basis points since the start of the year and yields have dropped, spoiling the appetite for many investors.
"Maybe lead managers were overly optimistic about the potential placing capabilities and appetite of foreign investors," said Jan Pudil of WoodCommerz.
"Of course this hunger has been filled quite substantially. At this stage we are at the level where these investors are now satisfied," he added.
More than 20 bond issues were launched in crowns by a host of top-rated, retail-friendly names, lured by its reputation as one of Europe's most stable currencies.
German media group Bertelsmann AG launched on Tuesday a one billion crown one-year bond with a 10.5 percent coupon, but the rate of issuance has slowed.
Analysts estimate about 90 percent of the crown bonds were bought by retail investors from Germany, the Benelux countries and Switzerland.
Investors saw a great chance of picking up high-yield, low-risk paper but issuers and managers were presented with an easy arbitrage opportunity since rates were so high.
But Pudil said that issuers, once awash in opportunities for currency swaps, were now hard pressed to find advantageous rates allowing many to place bonds with coupons above 10 percent, a psychological minimum level.
"You have a three-year swap now at 10.25 percent and if you were to bring a cross-currency swapped three-year Eurobond, you get a coupon below 10 percent and you can't sell something to west European retail investors at below 10 percent," he said.
Another trader added: "A lot of the issues were swap driven, but swap prices have fallen below the Eurobond yields and this has stopped the arbitrage possibility."
"We also may see declining interest in buying Czech Eurobonds because the crown is so strong that its security is declining," he added.
The crown was fixed at a record high against its dollar/mark basket on Tuesday at 5.51 percent above the parity midpoint, some three percentage points higher than at the beginning of the year.
Traders added that two and three-year bonds are almost impossible to launch now, given the lack of arbitrage options. Most issuers had preferred short-dated bonds anyway due to an inverted yield curve which meant higher coupons are available at shorter maturities.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($ = 27.92 Czech Crowns)
The Czech crown fell sharply on Thursday following central bank comments that it was not satisfied with the currency's recent rise, but dealers said the crown remains attractive and should stabilise by week's end.
One of post-Communist Europe's most stable currencies, the crown has consistently reached record highs in recent weeks, fuelled by demand brought about from a wave of more than 30 billion crowns in Eurobond issues since the start of the year.
But while the crown was still well above its mark/dollar basket trading at 3.48 percent above parity, it was down over 60 basis points from its opening and some 200 points lower from Tuesday's record fixing at +5.51.
Analysts said, however, that the country's high interest rate differential and the country's overall economic stability should limit any further drop.
"For this week, we may see the crown slightly weaker, but the crown is still very attractive and I do not see space for much furthening weaking of it," said Jiri Becvar of BNP-Dresdner in Prague.
The central bank's repo rate remains solidly at 12.4 percent, while its discount rate has been at 10.5 percent since it was raised a full percentage point last June.
The fall comes on the heels of Wednesday's comment by the central bank it has the option of intervening on the market when necessary.
"Intervention (on the market) is our normal instrument, and we can use it whenever we are not satisfied (with the crown's exchange rate)," CNB spokesman Martin Svehla told Reuters.
"The other question is whether we are satisfied? You heard (CNB) governor (Josef Tosovsky) saying there is 'no reason' for the crown to be like this. It signals that the central bank is not fully satisfied with this development," he added.
He declined to elaborate, and said these were just "general" comments.
Breta Tichanek of ING Barings said he expected the crown to trade within the range plus four to plus five percent from the basket midpoint throughout the day.
"I think it's partially because of yesterday's comment (by the CNB) and the closing of some postions and speculative flows," he said.
The depth of the fall also took the market by surprise initially, with many dealers saying they had been prepared for an early attack on +4.25 percent, but expected London dealers to take profits and then stabilise.
"In fact there were new buyers after some brief consolidation and the index dropped to +3.45," said Petr Korous of CSOB.
"There are a lot of long positions and they have to be covered so the market may squeeze them. If there is nothing special I am very sceptical that we can see the crown index weaken much more than to around +3.00," he added.
Some crown dealers have said the central bank had been putting out feelers in the market recently, though most did not expect to see any intervention, especially after the weakening on Thursday.
The CNB has not intervened since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
The Czech crown, battered down by central bank comments in recent days, rebounded on Friday bolstered by a wave of foreign currency selling though dealers cautioned the market remains very nervous.
In late afternoon trading, the crown was at 4.70 percent above its mark/dollar basket parity, up more than 50 basis points from the open but still some 80 basis points from Tuesday's record fixing at +5.51.
"Some bigger foreign players pushed the crown up, selling hard currency for crowns," said Jiri Ubry of ING Bank.
Added Martin Strauch of Citibank: "There were some break-even sellers in the market and the crown has now rebounded to near its peak before the central bank's comments."
One of post-Communist Europe's most stable currencies, the crown has consistently reached record highs in recent weeks, fuelled by demand brought about from a wave of more than 30 billion crowns in Eurobond issues since the start of the year.
But the market made an about face on Wednesday after the central bank said it has the option of intervening on the market when necessary.
The crown fell over 200 basis points against parity as many London traders bailed out over the next two days.
Petr Korous of bank CSOB said some profit taking was also pushing the crown higher, and that there still appeared to be a large number of traders with long positions of hard currency against Czech crowns that may now sell off.
"When there were these comments from the central bank, a couple of big players may have bought hard currency because they had never held a long position before and got nervous," Korous said.
"It looks like now they are slightly losing patience and getting rid of their positions at slightly higher than what we saw just three days ago," he added.
Dealers said they have seen few indications that the central bank was again on the verge of intervening, adding that they did not expect any action since the crown was not likely to rise above the five percent parity level.
The CNB has not intervened directly on the market since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
Few dealers predicted the crown would rise much further since the market was so nervous, but noted the crown appeared to have good support at around 4.5 percent above parity.
"It's tough to predict the crown's direction right now becuase it's so volatile in relation to any comments about it," said Citibank's Strauch.
Korous also noted that the current stalemate in parliament where the ultra-right Republican and Communist opposition deputies have used stalling tactics to drag out debate for four days over a sensitive post-World War Two reconciliation agreement with Germany could create more instability.
"I feel that we won't go to the levels we saw recently because there is some nervousness over the political scene here,especially when the ruling politicians have no idea how to eliminate the obstructions they are causing," he said.
Czech industrial output growth slowed in 1996, but analysts said they were more concerned with a sharp rise in wages that is dulling the country's competitive edge and exacerbating the impact of a widening trade deficit.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Monday that industrial output, in real terms, rose 1.5 percent in December, putting output 6.8 percent higher for the whole of 1996, down from 9.2 percent for the previous year.
It also said nominal industrial wages grew 17.4 percent last year, after 17 percent growth in 1995.
While analysts said they were not surprised by the output figures due to a continued slowdown in the economies of the Czechs' biggest trading partners, they said wages were growing far too fast.
"I think the slowdown in output is not a big surprise given the problems with economies abroad and the stronger than expected crown," said Vladimir Kreidl, an economist at Patria Finance, who said he expects output to remain steady in 1997.
"The wage growth and trade deficits are by far the two most troublesome developments in the economy. Nominal wages should not be growing by more than 12 or 13 percent, which would be in line with productivity," he added.
The crown has strengthened by some three percentage points against its currency basket since the beginning of the year, pushed higher mainly by demand from some 30 billion crowns worth of crown-denominated Eurobond issues.
The strength of the crown has also negatively effected the trade deficit, stifling exports as the gap grew to a record of more than 160 billion crowns for 1996.
"The Czech Republic is a strong country but it's got to deal with some of the sypmtoms of success such as these very large capital inflows that have driven the currency too high," said Jonathan Garner, director of research at Robert Fleming.
Added Patria's Kreidl: "Wage growth could effect inflation but foreign competition is so strong that we haven't seen that impact yet, and probably won't. But at the same time, Czech companies are losing competitiveness."
The Czech crown is fixed daily at up to plus or minus 7.5 percent of the mid-point of a basket comprising 35 percent dollars and 65 percent marks.
On Monday, the central bank fixed the crown at 28.357 to the dollar and 16.737 to the mark putting the currency 4.65 percent above the mid-point.
Many investors have flocked to the crown given the Czech Republic's stable political and economic climate, and its high interest rates.
Most analysts agree, however, that the central bank can ill afford to cut rates at the present, given the necessity to keep inflation and the money supply in check.
"There has to be some break in the development of nominal wages in industry. It will be difficult to do. Monetary policy must remain tight...there is no place for lower rates," said one analyst.
In the middle of 1996 the CNB raised the discount rate to 10.5 percent from 9.5 percent and increased minimum reserve requirements on primary deposits to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent. Interbank money market rates up to three months in the Republic hover around 12.5 percent.
Though rates eased some 60 basis points in January, the central bank ond government officials have both expressed reluctance officially to lower rates because of strong demand for money and investments.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech central bank, for the second time in a week, said on Tuesday that it was prepared to intervene to stop the crown from strengthening further, pushing the crown lower and prompting a sell-off by London traders.
"Our starting point is that parity is a base, and this is the right level (for the crown)," Jiri Pospisil, the head of the Czech National Bank's (CNB) monetary department, told an economic conference.
After the comment, the crown was still well above its mark/dollar basket midpoint at 28.750/dollar 16.873/mark, or 3.68 percent over parity with the basket, but down nearly 100 basis points from the CNB's daily fixing at +4.65 percent.
"There is a debate going on at the central bank over the nature of the appreciation of the exchange rate, and on the most suitable way to react to it," Pospisil, who is also on the CNB board, said.
"The debate has not been finished but our possibilities are clear: either we can react through interest rates or through direct intervention on the market," he added.
One of post-Communist Europe's most stable currencies, the crown consistently reached record highs in late January and early February, fuelled by demand brought about by a wave of more than 30 billion crowns in Eurobond issues since the start of the year.
The crown's surge has also been boosted by investors taking advantage of interest rate spreads against major currencies and an inverted yield curve.
Dealers said Pospisil's comments had shaken the market, especially some foreign investors, and could force the crown down further before it finds support.
"This has really shaken the market badly," said one London analyst. "I think a sell-off could push it down to as low as three percent above parity before finding some support."
It was the second time in the past week that central bank comments have pushed the crown sharply lower.
Last Wednesday the central bank said it had the option of intervening on the market when necessary, prompting London dealers to bail out over the next two days and pushing the crown down some 200 basis points against parity.
Despite Pospisil's words, dealers said that it did not appear that any intervention was imminent as it could not lower rates due to concerns over controlling the money supply and inflation.
"I think the central bank is trying to make the crown more volatile by its comments, but I'm not sure if it is ready to do anything real such as intervene," said Breta Tichanek of ING Bank. "They are just trying to push the crown back to parity by letting the market do it in its own way," he added.
The CNB has not intervened since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
The CNB's repo rate remains solidly at 12.4 percent, while its discount rate has been at 10.5 percent since it was raised a full percentage point last June. Meanwhile, inflation in January slowed to 7.4 percent, year-on-year, from 8.6 percent in December.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Czech Republic's trade deficit nearly doubled in January, year-on-year, as exports stagnated, and analysts said they saw little change in the trend of the burgeoning trade shortfall.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said the January trade deficit hit 13.6 billion crowns compared with a 7.86 billion crown deficit in January 1996.
The CSU added that imports, led by continued strong inflows of machinery and raw materials, grew by 8.2 percent year-on-year, while exports contracted by 2.5 percent, spurred by a sharp 11.8 percent decrease in raw material exports.
"The figures are better than expected...the market expected above 15 billion crowns...but I don't think it will mean any change in the trade (balance's) development," said Petr Tomek of Zivnostenska Banka.
The bureau did not issue a revised end-year 1996 figure for the trade balance, which hit a record 160.3 billion crowns. It has forecast the 1997 trade deficit to rise to about 215 billion crowns.
The CSU said overall nominal imports for January firmed to 60.04 billion crowns from 55.5 billion for the same month last year, while exports totalled 46.45 billion, down from a previous 47.63 billion.
Boris Gomez of ING Barings said that while January's trade figures were an improvement from December, where the monthly figure was 17.996 billion crowns, the beginning of the year is traditionally a period of slowing trade.
"We're not overly encouraged since historically the first two months of the year we usually see relatively lower deficits because of generally weaker trade flows," he said.
"We are hoping for a stabilisation of the deficit. If what happened last year when the deficit picked up pace in the second quarter, it's not good, though we are banking on import growth slowing a bit given the tight monetary environment."
Last summer the central bank tightened its monetary policy, raising its discount rate one full percentage point to 10.5 percent, and minimum reserve requirements on primary deposits to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent. Interbank money market rates up to three months in the Republic hover around 12.5 percent.
Analysts added that the trade figures were also influenced by the strengthening of the currency, the crown, which gained some three percentage points against its dollar/mark basket in January, boosted by demand brought about by a wave of over 35 billion crowns worth crown-denominated Eurobonds.
"If the Bundesbank sees it policy down the road of keeping the mark relatively weak to help the economy, that's not good news for the Czechs, nor are the rumblings that the economic recovery of the EU may be slower than expected," Gomez said.
CSU figures showed EU countries accounted for more than 60 percent of both imports and exports with the Czech Republic.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Czech trading firms saw the trade deficit nearly doubling, year-on-year, in the first quarter of 1997, while analysts said the figures were in line with forecasts and the crown firmed on the news.
A survey of importers and exporters by the Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU), released on Wednesday, showed the trade deficit should rise to about 45 billion crowns ($1.6 billion) for the quarter, up from a 27.1 billion crown gap for the first quarter 1996.
Analysts said the survey figures were realistic given the January shortfall of 13.6 billion crowns, adding the first quarter was usually a slow period for trade and the deficit should grow substantially after the quarter.
"It's more or less in line with our forecasts, but I think the deficit situation will gradually worsen throughout the year," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance told Reuters.
The CSU itself has issued a forecast for the overall 1997 trade deficit to rise to between 211-219 billion crowns after last year's record shortfall of 160.3 billion crowns, but it has not issued its own quarterly estimate.
The CSU said in a statement the survey included estimates from firms which accounted for 20 percent of all import business last year, and 36 percent of exports.
It said 170 firms were polled in the survey, of which 67 percent responded.
"The real question lies in how much the deficit will accelerate after the first quarter," said one London-based analyst. "Last year we saw a sharp increase in the pace of growth in the deficit and if that occurs again, it could be a problem."
The survey showed total imports were expected to rise in the first quarter by some 10 percent, year-on-year, with raw materials, foodstuffs and machinery imports accounting for most of the growth. Total imports in the first quarter of 1996 were 174.3 billion crowns.
Import prices were expected to edge about two percent higher overall, though prices of chemicals and related products, beverages and tobacco should ease slightly.
It said total exports for the quarter should remain static at last year's 147.2 billion crown level. Export prices should rise by about 2.5 percent, year-on-year.
Ironically, the forecast reassured the foreign exchange (forex) market, after the crown lost ground on reports that several German banks were expecting a weakening of the currency and were not recommending clients to buy Czech state debt.
Forex dealers said the crown fell by as much as 50 basis points against its dollar/mark basket midpoint because of the reports, but recovered some 30 basis points to 3.55 percent above the midpoint, or 28.430 to the dollar and 17.017 to the mark after the forecast.
"I think 45 billion crowns is the amount that probably all economists were expecting...The crown began to rebound right after the forecast was released," said Jiri Ubry of ING Bank. ($ = 28.46 Czech Crowns)
The Prague Stock Exchange's 1997 bull run ground to a halt on Thursday as investors took profits, and analysts predicted prices would continue falling in the short-term.
The PX50 index, which has shot up over 16 percent  this year to a two-year high on Tuesday of 629.0, retreated 14.0 points, or 2.23 percent, to close at 613.6 on Thursday.
Leading the bourse lower were its three biggest issues -- SPT Telecom a.s., power utility CEZ a.s. and Komercni Banka a.s. -- each of which fell more than 2.2 percent at the fix.
The profit-taking came as little surprise.
"It's a very thin market and when you see a little profit-taking like we are, the market kind of collapses," said Jan Sykora of brokers Wood and Company. "I am afraid that the trend will probably continue."
Analysts said they expected Komercni to be hardest hit of the blue chips, after rising more than 600 crowns ($20), or over 25 percent, since the start of the year. Komercni closed down 4.9 percent on Thursday.
They added that SPT, which has gained over 500 crowns, or more than 12 percent, in 1997, also looks expensive at current levels.
"The blue chips should cool off now and pull the market a bit lower," said one local trader. "But they will not fall completely out of favour since they are the only shares on the market that are liquid enough to buy or sell when you want."
After a disappointing 1996 which saw the PSE underperform its rivals in Budapest and Warsaw, the Prague bourse has been revitalised this year as foreign investors begin to return to a market they once abandoned because it was too "murky".
Czech authorities, seeking to improve the tarnished image of the country's capital markets, are taking steps to increase transparency and boost investor confidence.
The Central Securities Registry (SCP) began from February 4 to publish, with one day's delay, the price and other information about each stock trade it registers. The SCP is where some 60 percent of share transactions are executed.
The Prague Stock Exchange's governing chamber has also agreed to publish the prices of off-market trades conducted by its members from March 3.
As a first step towards setting up an independent securities commission, the Finance Ministry's markets supervision department has been transformed into a Bureau for the Control of Securities with an 11-strong advisory board, including market players.
The moves appear to be working with many investors finding it time to stop neglecting the market by adding Czech weight to their investment portfolios.
"We are seeing a lot of new money coming into the country and a lot of investors buying. I think this will continue," said Dan Gladis of Atlantik Financi Trhy.
"I don't think the correction will be that deep because of this and after a period of stabilisation we should see the market rise again," he added.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
Profit-taking and changing market sentiment pulled the Czech crown lower on Thursday, and dealers said they expected a further weakening of the currency since there were few fundamentals to support it.
Once one of Europe's most stable currencies, confidence in the crown has been shaken badly in the past two weeks as the market became nervous following central bank comments that it was overvalued and that interest rate cuts may be in the air.
In late afternoon trading, the crown was at 28.873 against the dollar and 17.090 to the mark, implying +2.74 against basket midpoint after opening at +3.53 percent.
Dealers said it had been pushed lower as thoughts turned to actions and investors ran to take profits while they could.
"The fall is part profit-taking, and part change in market sentiment," said Breta Tichanek of ING Bank in Prague.
"We are really seeing an outflow of investment from the crown at this moment, but I don't think it will last for more than a couple of weeks," he added.
At midday the central bank followed the early trend with its daily fixing, putting the crown/dollar at 28.784, and the crown/mark at 17.040, or +3.03 against the basket.
The pullout follows recent media reports that German banks see the crown moving lower and are advising clients to stay away from Czech bonds.
The crown had strengthened since the beginning of the year by about three percent against the basket as demand from a wave of over 35 billion crowns worth of crown-denominated Eurobonds.
"The market has been very nervous and I think the German media reports were the last straw for some investors. They have decided to take their profits now and run," said a London-based trader.
At the crown's peak earlier this month -- before talk of possible central bank intervention on the market -- it rose to +5.5 percent over parity.
Many investors had boosted the crown as they looked to take advantage of a high interest rate differential with western Europe but the central bank comments, coupled with an easing of interbank market rates have taken away much of the crown's lustre.
"I think the market is on a calm wave...we expect further tests for the Czech crown weakening. We see also movement on the money market and money market derivatives," said Petr Korous of Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka.
Prague Interbank Offered Rates (PRIBOR) on Thursday traded in a range of 11.5-12.5 percent, down about 60-70 basis points from the beginning of the year.
ING's Tichanek said there was little chance the currency would come close to returning to its highs earlier this month, adding the crown was having trouble finding strong support at current levels.
Further damaging confidence in the crown is the country's burgeoning trade deficit.
The Czech Statistical Bureau has forecast a 1997 shortfall of between 211-219 billion crowns after last year's record deficit of 160.3 billion crowns and analysts say that later in the year the crown will find itself under increasing depreciation pressure because of this.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
The Prague Stock Exchange's 1997 bull run, as expected, ground to a halt on Thursday as investors took profits, and analysts predicted little change in the bourse's fortunes over the short-term.
The PX50 index, which has shot up over 16 percent since trading began this year to a two-year high on Tuesday of 629.0, retreated 9.0 points, or 1.43 percent, at the bourse's daily price fixing to 618.6.
Leading the bourse lower were losses to its three biggest issues -- SPT Telecom, CEZ and Komercni Banka -- each of which fell more than 2.2 percent at the fix.
"It's a very thin market and when you see a little profit-taking like we are, the market kind of collapses," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company. "I am afraid that the trend will probably continue."
Analysts said they expected Komercni to be hardest hit of the blue chips, after rising more than 600 crowns, or over 25 percent, since the start of the year.
They added that SPT, which has gained over 500 crowns, or more than 12 percent, in 1997, also looks expensive at current levels.
"The blue chips should cool off now and pull the market a bit lower, but they will not fall completely out of favour since they are the only shares on the market that are liquid enough to buy or sell when you want," said one local trader.
After a disappointing 1996 which saw the PSE underperform its rivals in Budapest and Warsaw, the Prague bourse has been revitalised this year as foreign investors begin to return to a market they once abandoned because it was too "murky".
But Czech authorities, seeking to improve the tarnished image of the country's capital markets, are taking steps to increase transparency and boost investor confidence.
The Central Securities Registry (SCP) began from February 4 to publish, with one day's delay, the price and other information about each stock trade it registers. The SCP is where some 60 percent of share transactions are executed.
The Prague Stock Exchange's governing chamber has also agreed to publish the prices of off-market trades conducted by its members from March 3.
And, as a first step towards setting up an independent securities commission, the Finance Ministry's markets supervision department has been transformed into a Bureau for the Control of Securities with an 11-strong advisory board, including market players.
The moves appear to be working with many investors finding it time to stop neglecting the market by adding Czech weight to their investment portfolios.
"We are seeing a lot of new money coming into the country and a lot of investors buying. I think this will continue," said Dan Gladis of Atlantik Financi Trhy.
"I don't think the correction will be that deep because of this and after a period of stabilisation we should see the market rise again," he added.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
