Britain's commercial property market may be improving but it has not yet got a clean bill of health, a senior Bank of England official said on Wednesday.
"It would be rash to conclude that the market is now unambiguously healthy in all respects. There are still several factors which will continue to pose challenges to the investment, banking and valuing communities," said Pen Kent, executive director at the Bank of England.
Kent said that while lease lengths had temporarily stabilised, clauses by which tenants could break leases were becoming more common and many would need less space.
"It is clear too that many occupiers will continue over the long-term to reduce their needs for space and to demand greater flexibility," Kent told the Investment Property Forum in a speech.
A combination of factors were making it "less straightforward to form a view of the quality of cashflow likely to stem from a particular building", he added.
There was a sizeable overhang of unlet secondary property. "The pool of such property increases every time that a major user of space moves into new offices and releases its former premises," he said.
Kent called for solutions to the problems of much secondary stock not being suitable for conversion to alternative uses or never being able to be relet. "This will continue to exert a dampening influence on the market and imaginative solutions will be needed."
Kent also outlined his views on the future for the market. While institutional investors were attracted to the sector in the short-term "they could easily resume their longer-term departure from property in a couple of years", he said.
This could occur if the property market's performance waned as the economic cycle progressed and other assets began to look Banks might also become disillusioned with property again "particularly if they relax their lending criteria too far in the current exceptionally competitive lending market".
Kent also warned that while healthy competition between lenders was a good thing, "history suggests that the seeds of tomorrow's losses are sown when lenders relax the basics such as loan to value ratios and income cover; or when they take very bullish views on the likely strength of cashflows".
The BoE had heard some lenders were seeking to pressurise valuers into higher valuations. "This is not a healthy practice and we hope both the lenders and the valuing profession will be strong enough to resist," he said.
On a more positive note, Kent said there had been welcome progress on the development of property derivatives and securitisation as well as improving the quality of market information. He said he supported suggestions that commercial transaction prices should be made public.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell's dispute with suspended star fund manager Nicola Horlick highlights a "merry-go-round" hiring system started by investment banks, banking sources said on Wednesday.
"One of the industry's failings is that it doesn't bring people up through the system. When a firm needs someone, it steals people from a competitor. This creates a destructive merry-go-round which can't be in anyone's interests," one banker said.
Newspapers said DMG suspended Horlick on Tuesday because she allegedly tried to lure colleagues at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, where she was head of UK pension fund business, to join her in a move to Dutch bank ABN AMRO.
ABN AMRO itself denied reports that the 35-year-old Horlick was poised to lure a team with her and DMG has declined to comment on the details of Horlick's suspension, except to say it centred on a potential breach of contract.
While the term "poaching" is widely used to describe the movement of teams from one firm to another, loyal colleagues following a key player to a new employer is nothing new, the banking sources said.
Most moves involve a significant salary and bonus rise and often swiftly follow payment of bonuses by the firm which an individual is leaving.
Banking sources said U.S. investment bank Goldman Sachs, reported to have paid record bonuses last year, had lost a handful of staff since the payments were made.
In suspending Horlick, DMG, the investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, has brought back into the open a subject often seen as a normal part of the rough and tumble associated with investment banking -- but which might be relatively new to the more staid world of fund management, the sources said.
"We are surprised to be mentioned in the context of poaching which would, by its nature, imply you are planning to take a whole team, which we are not," ABN AMRO chief spokesman Jules Prast told Reuters.
But he said he preferred not to discuss whether ABN AMRO had talked to or planned to talk to Horlick, who newspaper reports said had earned more than 500,000 pounds ($835,000) a year.
"She (Horlick) had certainly led a number of people in the (MGAM) division to think that she had ABN AMRO lined up," one banking source told Reuters.
But if Horlick was about to take a team of up to 20 fund managers with her to ABN AMRO, which is expanding its fund management activities in London, she might have given DMG a dose of its own medicine.
The investment bank has gained a reputation in recent years for an aggressive hiring spree aimed at top performers at other firms, which led to widespread suggestions that DMG was offering guaranteed bonuses -- some for up to two years -- to ensure that it got the staff it wanted.
This came to a head last July when DMG reached agreement with another Dutch firm, ING Barings, the investment banking division of Internationale Nederlanden Groep, over a separate poaching dispute.
ING Baring's chief executive, Hessel Lindenbergh, said at the time there was "growing resistance and irritation in the industry towards firms which deliberately poach whole teams" and that "poaching teams pushes up pay unduly".
Last year, DMG's global bonds chief Edson Mitchell said the firm had hired around 500 people since he left his previous firm Merrill Lynch. Many of the new staff came from Merrill, while others moved from the then S.G. Warburg arm of SBC Warburg. ($1=.5976 Pound)
London will defend its share of foreign exchange trading once a single European currency comes into being, according to Judith Mayhew, who became the new head of the Corporation of London on Thursday.
"We must maintain our market share at all costs," Mayhew, who was elected as chairman of the Corporation's policy and resources committee, told Reuters in an interview. The body is the local authority for London's traditional financial hub.
Mayhew, a 48-year-old New Zealander who has lived and worked in the City of London since 1976, said the Corporation faces three main challenges. She sees the first as the body's survival to make sure it continues to represent the views of the City.
Her second challenge is to ensure that "when the euro is introduced the City of London is the primary market (for it)" while the third is to ensure LIFFE, the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange, dominates the derivatives market for the European single currency.
While Mayhew did not give her view on whether she would rather see the pound in or out of a the single currency, she said it was important for Britain to remain at the negotiating table for as long as possible while deciding its own approach.
And whatever Britain's attitude, the Corporation will work closely with Europe on technical aspects of its introduction.
If the trading of the euro is split more evenly between Europe's main financial centres, the only places to benefit will be New York and Tokyo which will lap up London's business, she said. And one of the Corporation's main aims is to increase the number of global banking headquarters within the Square Mile.
Mayhew said that regardless of the colour of the next British government -- the ruling Conservative party must hold an election by May -- the Corporation will continue to lobby for the right taxation levels and employee costs.
It will also look closely at the outflow of its revenue to the rest of Britain.
"Perhaps the balance is not right," she said. The body keeps only a tenth of its 700 million pound ($1.18 billion) revenue.
She believes London's strength comes from its international business, not from its domestic business and this makes it the ideal site for Europe's financial capital. She would have liked the future European Central Bank to have been here rather than Frankfurt but noted London already has the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Mayhew said the Corporation would continue to support the local authorities in surrounding boroughs, both through charitable work and other projects in deprived areas.
"It is an irony that we have got perhaps the richest part of Europe surrounded by some of the poorest parts," she said.
As long as there remained a threat of bomb attacks on the City of London, Mayhew said the so-called "ring of steel" erected to deter attacks by IRA guerillas would continue.
She described competition for prime investment banking tenants with the Docklands area to the east of the City as a healthy rivalry and welcomed the extra office space provided by the vast modern redevelopment of the former docks site.
"The City would like to remain dominant in keeping the primary markets together," Mayhew said, adding such close proximity was important to the way people worked.
And she welcomed a recent resurgence in London's property market, "It is very good that the cranes are overhead in the City again and there is more development. Modern cities need modern office space," she said.
($1=.5958 Pound)
"Superwoman" fund manager Nicola Horlick announced her resignation on Thursday from Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG), leaving what she called a feeling of "turmoil" among fund managers at the German-owned bank.
A spokesman for Horlick, who had been head of British pension fund business at DMG's Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), told Reuters she had quit and was planning legal action against her former employer over "constructive dismissal".
Horlick had been suspended on Tuesday pending the outcome of an internal investigation into what Deutsche Morgan Grenfell described as "a potential breach of her contract".
The dispute was believed to revolve around allegations Horlick was looking to move and take staff with her. It follows a scandal last year at MGAM over misvaluations in three of its funds and the subsequent sacking of fund manager Peter Young.
The suspension of Horlick, dubbed superwoman in financial circles because of her ability to hold a high-powered job while looking after five children, prompted reports of unease among large pension fund clients at the firm.
The row erupted only days after Horlick received news of a promotion to managing director from MGAM chief executive Robert Smith, a banking source said. "They shook hands on it last Friday," the source said.
Horlick, in an interview with the Financial Times published on Friday, described disquiet at MGAM over the Young affair. She said the promotion came after a group of fund managers who worked under her said they would leave the company unless she be given more authority.
"They demanded that I be given more authority. They felt that things were in turmoil following the Peter Young affair."
Young, currently under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office, has denied any involvement in criminal activity.
The Horlick saga is said to have unsettled pension fund clients at DMG, but the company said earlier on Thursday that it did not expect any exodus of its pension fund clients.
Banking sources also said DMG was confident other fund managers would not follow in Horlick's footsteps and that there was a climate of loyalty to MGAM's Smith.
But DMG has been in the spotlight for months over the Peter Young affair, which has been costly as well as embarassing. In December Deutsche Bank agreed to a compensation package of around 200 million pounds ($335 million) to make good losses suffered by investors. Deutsche also saw its coveted triple-A credit rating from Moody's dropped last month.
In October Deutsche named Rolf Breuer, a 58-year-old investment banker, as its new head. Breuer will take over on May 20 and is expected to fight hard to avoid the criticism and mistrust that dogged his predecessor Hilmar Kopper.
Kopper never managed to shrug off the "peanuts" tag attached to him in 1994 after he used the word to describe losses caused by the collapse of the Schneider property empire, with which Deutsche was closely involved.
Peanuts are just about the last word the British press have been using in connection with Horlick. She was reported to have earned one million pounds ($1.68 million) a year.
In the newspaper interview, she tells of a last attempt to solve things with DMG when she met with Smith on Wednesday. "The meeting ended up with me in tears and Robert Smith very depressed," she was quoted as saying. Horlick said a request to be reinstated was rejected by Smith on Thursday, the FT said.
There has been press speculation Horlick was preparing a move to Dutch bank ABN AMRO with others in her team, but ABN has denied any attempt of poaching a fund manager team. It declined to say whether it had tried to hire Horlick.
In the interview Horlick said, "ABN AMRO is a red herring," adding: "I completely concur with what ABN AMRO have said."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 6784
"Superwoman" pension fund manager Nicola Horlick announced her resignation on Thursday from Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) only days after she was reported to have been offered a promotion at the firm.
A spokesman for Horlick, who had been head of British pension fund business at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell's MGAM, told Reuters she had quit and was planning legal action against her former employer over "constructive dismissal".
Horlick, dubbed superwoman in financial circles because of her ability to hold a high-powered job while looking after five children, was suspended at MGAM on Tuesday, prompting reports of unease among large pension fund clients at the firm.
The suspension was pending the outcome of an internal investigation into what Deutsche Morgan Grenfell described as "a potential breach of her contract".
"She has resigned," a spokesman for Horlick said. "She will be taking (legal) action against DMG."
The dispute with MGAM was believed to revolve around allegations that Horlick tried to take a number of her MGAM team with her in a move to Dutch bank ABN AMRO.
But the row erupted only days after Horlick received news of a promotion to managing director from MGAM chief executive Robert Smith, a banking source said.
"They shook hands on it last Friday," the source said.
MGAM last year was rocked by revelations of misvaluations in three of its funds and the subsequent sacking of fund manager Peter Young, who is currently under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office. Young has denied any involvement in criminal activity.
Horlick, in an interview with the Financial Times published on Friday, described disquiet at MGAM over the Young affair, She said the promotion came after a group of fund managers who worked under her said they would leave the company unless she be given more authority.
Around six MGAM fund managers and a senior executive met for dinner on Thursday last week, she said in the newspaper interview. "They demanded that I be given more authority. They felt that things were in turmoil following the Peter Young affair."
Pension fund clients of DMG, the investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, are said to be unsettled by the Horlick saga. But DMG said on Thursday that it did not expect any exodus of its pension fund clients.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 6784
Morgan Grenfell and its former fund manager Nicola Horlick appeared no nearer settling their differences on Monday as more pension fund clients signalled they would be reassessing their relations with the group.
Horlick, who last week resigned her lucrative job after she was suspended by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) for an alleged breach of contract, was locked in an all-day meeting with legal representatives in London's financial heartland.
Earlier her lawyers said she wanted an amicable settlement with her ex-employer but that the 35-year-old mother-of-five, one of the most prominent fund managers in London, was prepared to sue if they could not strike a deal.
"She is still hopeful that there might be an amicable resolution. If she is not able to get a quick and amicable resolution then she is still looking at legal action on the grounds that she was constructively dismissed," said John Farr, a partner at law firm Herbert Smith.
Precise details of what precipitated Horlick's sudden departure from MGAM, depicted by the firm as an attempt by her to lure colleagues with her to a rival, have yet to emerge and former colleagues refused to comment on newspaper reports.
"Basically I just want to get on with my job and look after my clients," one, who declined to be named, told Reuters. Others also appeared to have rallied behind MGAM chief executive Robert Smith, arguing they were getting on with the business of reassuring clients and managing their funds.
MGAM has run an intensive damage-limitation campaign, writing to all clients of its 18 billion pound ($29.89 billion) British pension fund business and set up meetings with some.
But this did not prevent two more from voicing their concerns over events at the firm, still reeling from last year's revelations of irregularities at three of its retail investment funds which led to the sacking of fund manager Peter Young.
Young, who denies any involvement in criminal activity, is now under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO).
The London Borough of Lewisham, which has 300 million pounds under sole management with MGAM, said it was concerned at recent developments and would decide at a meeting in March whether to continue with MGAM or to put the contract out to tender.
And Norfolk County Council, which has some 390 million pounds with MGAM adopted a similar tone, saying it was "naturally concerned by recent events...and is keeping a close watch upon developments" but it was not taking any action.
Meanwhile Farr said Horlick's first priority was to get her job back as head of British pension fund business at MGAM but if this did not happen she wanted compensation.
Earlier his client said the issue was not about money but about clearing her name. Farr did not quantify the level of compensation Horlick would be seeking but said she was entitled to a year's notice and her bonus was "still open to discussion".
Horlick, who only days before her suspension was promoted to managing director by chief executive Robert Smith, wanted the matter resolved as quickly as possible, Farr said, adding he hoped this could be "within the week or the next few days".
MGAM is owned by Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the investment banking arm of Germany's powerful Deutsche Bank.
Horlick has strenously denied allegations that she was about to move with her team to a rival firm, widely rumoured to have been Dutch bank ABN AMRO, but said she met a friend from the bank in December at what she insists was a personal lunch.
MGAM declined comment on the latest developments except to repeat that it had no plans for any action of its own as Horlick was no longer one of its employees.
($1=.6021 Pound)
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell was unlikely to offer Nicola Horlick her job back, despite the former fund manager's continuing call for reinstatement, banking sources said.
"The ball's in her court," a banking source said late on Sunday, adding that Horlick's resignation last week meant that DMG's Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) was no longer obliged to discuss reinstatement with her.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell was preparing to launch an intensive campaign to shore up its pension fund business in the wake of Horlick's resignation at MGAM after she was suspended for allegedly trying to lure staff with her to another firm.
The investment banking arm of Germany's mighty Deutsche Bank was to meet key clients, but DMG spokesman James Murray denied pension firms were considering moving from its 18 billion pound ($30.11 billion) funds.
"We've had absolutely no indication that our institutional pension fund clients have plans at this stage to move their business," he said.
Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), the fund management arm of DMG, has already written to all its pension fund clients to limit any fall-out from the suspension and later resignation last week of senior British fund manager Horlick.
Some clients, including London's Westminster City Council, Scotland's Dumfries and Galloway County Council and the Merchant Navy Officers' Pension Fund, have expressed individual concern about recent events at MGAM.
And the Railway Pension Trustee Company, which has 1.25 billion pounds with MGAM, said it had met MGAM officials and would be in close contact with its asset managers.
Meanwhile, Horlick continued to deny the allegations that she had tried to lure staff away from MGAM.
"I think my colleagues know that's not the case," she told BBC television as reporters swarmed around her on Sunday.
Horlick was suspended from the firm only days after she had been promoted to managing director at MGAM.
Her subsequent resignation as head of MGAM's British pension fund business and dramatic dash to Frankfurt on Friday to plead with Deutsche Bank for her reinstatement received widespread coverage in British media.
"These people who I spoke to in Germany were very, very serious about all of this. And I want to give them a chance to sort this out," Horlick said on BBC television.
"What I really want is a proper resolution. And I still think that that means either reinstatement -- and I mean that, I like doing my job. Reinstatement or compensation," she added.
MGAM is still trying to regain an even keel after last year's revelations of irregularities at three of its retail investment funds, the sacking of fund manager Peter Young, a 180 million pound cash injection to bolster the funds and the announcement of a 200 million pound compensation package.
Young, who denies any involvement in criminal activity, is now under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO).
Much of the media coverage of Horlick's case has focused on the "human interest" angle with pictures of the 35-year-old -- dubbed Superwoman by British newspapers -- with her children at their luxury home in Kensington, west London.
Fund management sources said Horlick, who stated she managed between three-and-a-half and four billion pounds worth of the firm's business, had talked about a management buy-out.
But they said that even if this had been discussed informally it would have had no hope of success as DMG, along with many other firms, was keen to build its strength in this lucrative area and would not dismantle its business.
Horlick, who during a whirlwind campaign on Friday entered MGAM's London headquarters in an attempt to meet management and loudly proclaimed "Justice will be done", has said she wants to settle her differences as quickly as possible and is pinning her hopes on further talks with a Deutsche legal official.
She has said she plans legal action over what she claims was her "constructive dismissal" by the firm. But banking sources said it had not yet been served with any legal papers.
Horlick's spokesman distanced her from reports a December lunch meeting had marked the start of talks with Dutch bank ABN AMRO on a move there. He said it had been a personal engagement and "there was nothing culpable about meeting a friend...for lunch".
ABN AMRO has denied it tried to poach any MGAM staff. ($1=.5979 Pound)
A high profile dispute between investment bank Deutsche Morgan Grenfell and ousted star fund manager Nicola Horlick has highlighted how crucial the lucrative asset management business has become to banks eyeing a share of the growing market.
"The attraction of asset management is the quality of earnings is far better than virtually any of the other areas of business the banks are involved in," a banking analyst at one major European investment bank said.
Relatively low risk and a growing market are other key factors driving banks' sometimes aggressive interest in building up funds under management, according to John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers in London.
"The overall driver seems to be that it's a good growth business for relatively low risk," Leonard told Reuters.
He pointed out that once customer relationships were established, particularly on the retail side, they lasted -- although the institutional market could be more volatile.
Widespread media coverage of 35-year-old Horlick's dramatic resignation last week as head of British pension fund business at MGAM has brought home to the general public -- many of whom have pensions or savings with such firms -- just how much top performing individuals and their employers earn.
Horlick was suspended from the asset management arm of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, part of the mighty Deutsche Bank group, amid accusations she had tried to lure a group of colleagues to leave with her for rival firm ABN AMRO.
Horlick, who was reported to have earned one million pounds ($1.66 million) a year and was at the top of the industry in London, continues to deny allegations that she was leading a breakaway group.
Dutch bank ABN AMRO has also denied it tried to poach Horlick's team or was planning to back a management buy-out of its British pension fund business but on Tuesday told Reuters it would consider buying a large British fund manager and was keen to make "big steps" in London fund management.
The Horlick saga has demonstrated that banks are willing to match and substantially improve on the pay of such stars if it means they can gain ground in the battle for relationships with major pension funds and the fees they bring with them.
This high-quality fee and commission income promises to grow as the pool of funds in need of management is swelled by demographic changes and an increasing reliance on individuals making their own provision for old age rather than relying on diminishing state resources, analysts said.
Asset management, usually looking after other people's money rather than a firm's own, is not a capital-intensive business and margins remain attractive for those controlling the billions of pounds of pension fund and investment assets now swirling around the mature markets of Britain, the United States and Japan.
The British pension fund market alone is worth around 600 billion pounds, one analyst said, adding that the longer-term opportunities in Europe were good but that both Germany and France would have to persuade people to make their own provisions for their retirement before the market took off.
Compared to an increasingly competitive lending market, where margins are wafer thin and banks have to provide shareholder value while meeting stringent capital requirements on their loans, such business is another indication of banks being cut adrift from their traditional business.
"They are trying to replace revenues they are losing elsewhere. Asset management is seen as a growth business," Martin Cross, banking analyst at UBS said. ($1=.6021 Pound)
Germany's Dresdner Bank and Dutch bank ABN AMRO Holding NV may covet a larger slice of lucrative British fund management business, but analysts warned on Wednesday their shopping lists will be limited.
"Some of the smaller quoted firms might get snapped up," one banking analyst told Reuters, adding the price range for quoted asset management companies varied from between around 125 million pounds ($207.6 million) to several billion pounds.
"There's a large range of value out there, but nothing is on offer," he said.
Well-known top performers such as Mercury Asset Management (MAM) are likely to be prohibitively expensive and none of the major players have indicated they are up for grabs.
And the weaker fund firms are not likely to be of such great interest to European banks trying to make an immediate impact on the market rather than turn around a non-performer.
"There's an active trading market for these businesses but some banks feel the prices are too high," John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers said.
Banks are not alone in their desire to grab more asset management business, with insurance companies also in the frame. And as with other areas of financial services completely new entrants to the field are also expected.
Retailers like Marks and Spencer have been selling personal financial products for some time but supermarkets and companies such as Richard Branson's Virgin may begin to take on the dual roles of selling products and managing assets by linking up with life assurance or asset management firms.
Last November Dresdner, Germany's second largest commercial bank, announced a restructuring of its global fund management business to bring non-German funds under the management of its newly acquired San Francisco-based RCM Capital Management.
The new group, which incorporates London's Kleinwort Benson International Management and Thornton &amp; Co and is due to be named in March, will have assets under management of more than $50 billion, a quarter of the $200 billion managed asset volume of the whole Dresdner group.
Dresdner said on Wednesday it was interested in taking over a British fund manager and was also looking at expanding its asset management in France and Italy.
This came on top of comments by ABN AMRO this week that it too would buy in the right circumstances.
One analyst said ABN AMRO would regret it had not outsmarted Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc which captured British fund manager Gartmore almost a year ago for 472 million pounds.
Analysts said the problem for both ABN and Dresdner would be satisfying their desire for increased market share without sacrificing shareholder value by paying over the odds for an acquisition.
And because everyone wants a piece of the action, prices are likely to rise further. Shares in British fund management firms rose on Wednesday after the Dresdner comments.
MAM shares were up five pence at 1,260 pence in the early afternoon while Edinburgh Fund Managers shares were up five pence at 607.5 pence and Henderson shares were up 32.5 pence to 1,277.5 pence.
Analysts singled out Edinburgh Fund Managers and Ivory and Sime as two of the weaker share performers in the sector. "There are some asset management companies with quite depressed share prices," said one.
($1=.6021 Pound)
Investment banking giant Merrill Lynch on Wednesday took another step in building up its presence in the European equities markets with the purchase of an equities research and sales boutique in Italy.
The U.S. powerhouse's takeover of the Milan-based Carnegie Italia SpA follows a similar but larger move earlier this year in Spain when it bought FG Inversiones, the country's largest independent brokerage, for 3.7 billion pesetas ($29.5 million).
Merrill, which last year bought British equities specialist Smith New Court, said in a statement that the head of Carnegie Italia's team Tony Morrongiello would "spearhead Merrill Lynch's local institutional equity sales presence in Milan".
This would be in partnership with Merrill's existing Italian equity sales, research and trading teams in London, it added.
Paul Roy, Merril's head of equity sales and trading in Europe, said the move would give the firm "tremendous leverage in this important market" and enable better client service.
"We will also be better placed to offer strategic advice to Italian companies on local and international equity markets," Roy said in a statement.
The chairman of Merrill Lynch Europe, Christopher Reeves, said Italy had been identified as a growth area for the firm in equities, debt markets, private and investment banking.
Swedish stockbroker Carnegie said it had agreed to sell Merrill its Italian operations because it needed capital to expand in the Nordic region. It recently sold its operations in Spain and said it would also pull out of Portugal.
Neither party disclosed what Merrill would pay for the Italian operation, although given the small size of the operation the amount was not believed to be large.
Along with other investment banks, Merrill has until now "parachuted" relevant people in from London and New York when it has needed to wrap-up investment banking deals in European countries where it does not have an equity broking presence.
Analysts said that buying small firms in Europe and building local bases rather than employing a top-down approach from one core centre underlined the need for local relationships, particularly in areas such as corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions and initial public offerings (IPOs). ($1=125.5 Peseta)
A threatened overhaul of Britain's Securities and Investments Board (SIB) by a future Labour government and news it must find a new chairman will make the next few months uncertain for the top financial watchdog.
The opposition Labour Party has said that if it wins power in elections this year it would streamline London's regulatory bodies, giving the SIB greater responsibility.
But insiders at the SIB, which was set up in 1985 and is charged with ensuring regulatory system works efficiently, said on Friday it was business as usual at the watchdog.
While surprised by chairman Sir Andrew Large's decision on Thursday to give up his post at the end of May, industry sources said they believed his successor would not necessarily be plucked from the ranks of Britain's frontline regulators.
"They will not only have to have the intellect and leadership qualities, but also the gravitas and authority that must accompany the role," one told Reuters.
The SIB supervises the so-called "frontline" regulators which independently authorise firms to conduct investment business in Britain. These self-regulating organisations also monitor firms, handle complaints and punish rule-breakers.
Large said the bulk of the changes he had been charged with overseeing had been completed but pointed out that the main unfinished business was the unsatisfactory rate of progress on a a long-running review of pensions mis-selling.
This saga is likely to bedevil whoever takes over from Large as insurance companies seek to resolve outstanding pensions cases.
Newspapers said the job might go to Phillip Thorpe at the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO), Colette Bowe of the Personal Investment Authority (PIA) or former Securities and Futures Authority head Christopher Sharples.
"It (the job) has not gone to professional regulators before," the first source said.
Given the prospect of a new government, and possibly a new ruling political party, regulatory sources agree the appointment of 54-year-old Large's successor will be particularly significant.
The ruling Conservative Party must call an election by May 22 and opinion polls suggest a Labour victory may be the likely outcome.
A new SIB chairman may be named before the election but he or she will take over the reins in early June.
The choice of a new chairman is made jointly by the Treasury and the head of the Bank of England, but because of the timing of the appointment, the Labour party is also expected to be canvassed for its views on the individuals to be short-listed.
But the Treasury declined to comment on any of the names mentioned or how exactly the vacancy would be filled. "We are not detailing the procedure but at this stage no one is ruled in and no one is ruled out," a Treasury spokesman said.
A factor which could limit those wanting to be considered for the role is money, especially when compared with the sort of salaries paid in the private sector.
While top-quality bankers or financiers can expect large pay packets, the money on offer for the SIB job is expected to be relatively little by comparison. During the year 1995-96, Large was paid just over 175,000 pounds.
"The money could turn out to be the sticking point," one regulatory source said, adding that the selectors would not rush to find a replacement for Large. "Its a big job and its important to get the right person," he said.
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) was on Thursday drawn closer to the probe into alleged irregularities in three Morgan Grenfell investment funds.
At the same time it emerged the investigation had cast its net overseas, as City regulatory sources confirmed newspaper reports that the inquiry extended beyond Britain. The SFO said it was involved but was not mounting its own investigation.
A spokeswoman for the SFO said the office was in contact with Britain's investment watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) which would share any relevant material with the office. The SFO investigates and prosecutes major financial crimes in the City of London.
The Times newspaper said in its Friday edition that a senior SFO lawyer had been briefed officially by IMRO. It added that overseas authorities, in the U.S., Luxembourg and Switzerland, had also been involved in the process.
"We have been in contact with IMRO. IMRO are investigating and will share anything of relevance with us," the SFO spokeswoman told Reuters on Thursday.
And after the funds, which were suspended on Monday, resumed trading, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the UK-based investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, said nearly eight percent of three Morgan Grenfell investment funds being investigated for alleged irregularities had been redeemed.
The funds, run by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), were suspended due to suspected "irregularities," but resumed trading after Deutsche Bank spent 180 million pounds ($282.4 million) removing certain unlisted securities from the funds.
"This is good news because people were predicting they would be selling lots...but there has been no panic selling," said Deutsche Morgan Grenfell spokesman James Murray.
Industry sources, however, said that redemptions of eight percent in one day was a major reverse.
IMRO's own probe into MGAM has already led to the suspension of two fund managers and briefly saw trading halted in three MGAM funds, which have around 90,000 small investors.
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a UK-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
And a spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM. Fiba has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said the UK's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter. This had subsequently led to the unofficial investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen as a result of a high-court injunction last night, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.
DMG said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules." A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
In Frankfurt, a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
The fall-out spread to Sweden where Young had invested substantially in unlisted stocks. Stocks held in his portfolio fell amid concerns from Swedish officials about the impact of the probe on Sweden's alternative stock market.
In Britain the saga is likely to lead to a reappraisal of how funds are managed.
"We will be reviewing our collective investment scheme rules, in particular, the valuation of unquoted securities and the position of prelisted stocks," a spokesman at Britain's Securities and Investments Board (SIB) told Reuters.
Britain lost another independent corporate finance adviser on Tuesday with the sale of Phoenix Group to U.S. investment bank Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette (DLJ).
Neither party would comment on how much the deal was worth, but there was widespread speculation that "boutique" operation Phoenix had cost around 50 million pounds ($81 million).
This would make multi-millionaires of Phoenix's top directors who are its major shareholders, banking sources said.
"What's 50 million pounds to an American bank," said one corporate finance expert, adding that DLJ was buying Phoenix's British mergers and acquisitions expertise and hoping to use it as a springboard for building up its European business.
Others said this was a big price to pay given Phoenix's relatively slim revenues and profits. "Most people would say it was a pretty racy number," one corporate financier said, adding that DLJ was buying a relatively small number of deal-makers.
Phoenix, whose clients include mutual life insurer Scottish Amicable, was set up in 1981 and was bought by Morgan Grenfell in 1987. But it regained its independence in 1990 through a management buyout led by chairman Martin Smith and the other founders, Philip Seers and David Reid Scott.
The firm has gained a reputation for expertise in financial services. In 1996 it advised on transactions worth around 2.5 billion pounds and in August last year was ranked second by industry magazine Acquisitions Monthly in a league table of British-based independent corporate finance houses.
Philip Healey, editor of the magazine, said the sale last October of Hambro Magan -- which came top of the table -- was the catalyst for the Phoenix sale.
"That was when boutiques like Phoenix decided to put themselves up for sale," he said. Hambro Magan, whose founder George Magan had said it wanted to remain independent, was sold to NatWest Markets for an estimated 80 to 150 million pounds.
Healey said while other boutiques might try to take a similar route, there was nothing of a comparable size to Hambro Magan or Phoenix on offer.
Healey said Phoenix's directors, who own 60 percent of the company, could be seen as getting out at the top of the booming mergers and acquisitions market.
The new firm, to be called DLJ Phoenix, would play a leading role in developing DLJ's investment banking business in Europe and Asia. Smith will be chairman and all of Phoenix's 25 directors and staff will be retained, the two groups said.
Phoenix's three founding directors will be tied in to the new venture for four years, while middle management have signed agreements for a two-year period.
Corporate financiers said this might go some way to ensuring client relationships were maintained, but some pointed out that clients would have opted for Phoenix's independent advice over larger product-led firms and this could be at threat.
New York-based DLJ employs 5,900 people worldwide and describes itself as the leading distributor of U.S. equity securities to institutional investors outside the United States.
DLJ chairman and chief executive John Chalsty said Phoenix could help the group develop high-yield business and target newly emerging companies in eastern Europe and Russia.
He said DLJ had been operating in London for 20 years and was not looking for further acquisitions in the capital. ($1=.6199 Pound)
Britain's Serious Fraud Office said on Thursday it had become involved in a probe into alleged irregularities at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, the funds arm of Deutsche Bank's British-based investment bank.
A spokeswoman for the SFO said the office was in contact with British investment watchdog IMRO, which would share any relevant material with the office. The SFO investigates and prosecutes major financial crimes.
IMRO's own probe into MGAM has already led to the suspension of two fund managers and briefly saw trading halted in three MGAM funds, which have around 90,000 small investors.
"We have been in contact with IMRO. IMRO are investigating and will share anything of relevance with us," the SFO spokeswoman told Reuters.
Trading in the three funds resumed on Thursday after a 180 million pound ($280 million) bail-out by parent company Deutsche Bank.
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a British-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
A spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM.
Fiba Nordic Securities has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter.
This had subsequently led to the investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose own assets were frozen as a result of a high court injunction late on Wednesday, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.
Young had managed two of the three suspended funds.
MGAM said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules".
A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
But in Frankfurt a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
British brokers said they had had few redemptions in the three funds after trading resumed but the full extent of any exodus would only become apparent after a few weeks.
The fall-out from the MGAM investigation spread to Sweden, where Young had invested substantially in unlisted stocks. Stocks held in his portfolio fell amid concern about the impact of the probe. ($1=.6373 Pound)
Britain's Serious Fraud Office said on Thursday it had become involved in a probe into alleged irregularities at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, the funds arm of Deutsche Bank's UK-based investment bank.
A spokeswoman for the SFO said the office was in contact with British investment watchdog IMRO, which would share any relevant material with the office. The SFO investigates and prosecutes major financial crimes in the City of London.
IMRO's own probe into MGAM has already led to the suspension of two fund managers and briefly saw trading halted in three MGAM funds, which have around 90,000 small investors.
"We have been in contact with IMRO. IMRO are investigating and will share anything of relevance with us," the SFO spokeswoman told Reuters.
Trading in the three funds resumed on Thursday after a 180 million pound ($280 million) bail-out by parent company Deutsche Bank.
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a UK-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
A spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM.
Fiba Nordic Securities has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said the UK's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter.
This had subsequently led to the investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose own assets were frozen as a result of a high court injunction late on Wednesday, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.
Young had managed two of the three suspended funds.
MGAM said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules".
A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
But in Frankfurt a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
British brokers said they had had few redemptions in the three Morgan Grenfell funds after trading in them resumed but the full extent of any exodus would only become apparent after a few weeks.
"We are not seeing any panic selling. Redemption levels look modest at this stage," an MGAM spokesman told Reuters.
However, banking analysts in Frankfurt said Deutsche had to tighten up internal controls to prevent a repeat crisis at its UK fund management division.
"Something like this can never be allowed to happen again. If Deutsche really wants to be a global player in investment banking, then its control mechanisms must keep in step with its growth," said Vereinsbank analyst Natalia Grasegger.
The fall-out from the MGAM investigation also spread to Sweden, where Young had invested substantially in unlisted stocks. Stocks held in his portfolio fell amid concerns from Swedish officials about the impact of the probe on the country's alternative stock market. ($1=.6373 Pound)
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) was on Thursday drawn closer to the probe into alleged irregularities in three Morgan Grenfell investment funds.
At the same time it emerged the investigation had cast its net overseas, as City regulatory sources confirmed newspaper reports that the inquiry extended beyond Britain.
British newspapers said a number of holding companies listed in Luxembourg were under the microscope of investigators.
A spokeswoman for the SFO said the office was in contact with Britain's investment watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) which would share any relevant material with the office. The SFO investigates and prosecutes major financial crimes in the City of London.
The Times newspaper said in its Friday edition that a senior SFO lawyer had been briefed officially by IMRO. It added that overseas authorities, in the U.S., Luxembourg and Switzerland, had also been involved in the process.
"We have been in contact with IMRO. IMRO are investigating and will share anything of relevance with us," the SFO spokeswoman told Reuters on Thursday.
And after the 1.4 billion pound funds, which were suspended on Monday, resumed trading, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the UK-based investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, said nearly eight percent had been redeemed.
The funds, run by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), were suspended due to suspected "irregularities," but resumed trading after Deutsche Bank spent 180 million pounds ($282.4 million) removing certain unlisted securities from the funds.
"This is good news because people were predicting they would be selling lots...but there has been no panic selling," said Deutsche Morgan Grenfell spokesman James Murray.
Industry sources, however, said that redemptions of eight percent in one day was a major reverse.
IMRO's own probe into MGAM has already led to the suspension of two fund managers and briefly saw trading halted in three MGAM funds, which have around 90,000 small investors.
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a UK-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
And a spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM. Fiba has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said the UK's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter. This had subsequently led to the unofficial investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen as a result of a high-court injunction last night, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.
DMG said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules." A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
In Frankfurt, a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
The fall-out spread to Sweden where Young had invested substantially in unlisted stocks. Stocks held in his portfolio fell amid concerns from Swedish officials about the impact of the probe on Sweden's alternative stock market.
In Britain the saga is likely to lead to a reappraisal of how funds are managed.
"We will be reviewing our collective investment scheme rules, in particular, the valuation of unquoted securities and the position of prelisted stocks," a spokesman at Britain's Securities and Investments Board (SIB) told Reuters.  
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a British-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
A spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM. Fiba has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said Britain's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter. This had subsequently led to the unofficial investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen as a result of a high-court injunction, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.  
DMG said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules." A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
In Frankfurt, a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
In Britain the saga may lead to a reappraisal of how funds are managed, with the Securities and Investments Board promising to review collective investment scheme rules, valuations of unquoted securities and the status of prelisted stocks.
British banks have developed a greater understanding of the needs of small firms, but much remains to be done to finance the sector, the Bank of England (BoE) said in a report released on Wednesday.
"Relationships between small firms and their banks have improved greatly from a low point four years ago. The question is -- how much of this improvement is due simply to economic recovery, and how much to structural change," Howard Davies, the central bank's deputy governor, said in a statement.
Davies said while there had been genuine changes and banks did now better understand the needs of their small firm customers, there was "a lot more to do".
He said two areas that would receive particular attention were the financing of small exporters and the problems faced by ethnic minority businesses.
The report found that while bank finance continued to be the main form of external finance used by small firms -- described by the bank as small businesses with a turnover up to and including a million pounds a year -- asset-backed finance accounted for "a steadily increasing proportion".
Factors and invoice discounters reported strong growth during 1996 and there was an increase of 19 percent in the number of firms using the services they offer.
Factoring is a credit collection service whereby a company sells its receivables, the outstanding debts due to it, to a factor at a discount. The factor then collects the funds owed and earns a profit via the discount while the company benefits from an improved cash flow.
In the field of bank finance, the report found there was more reliance on the business proposition and less on collateral as well as a rebuilding of relationships between banks and small business customers -- a move from overdrafts to term loans.
Such loans "now account for around two thirds (by value) of the total of 35 billion pounds of bank lending to small firms," the report said.
Despite these changes, the bank's report found that the range of margins paid on small business borrowing did not change significantly during 1996. "Most fell within a range of two to between five and seven percent over base rate," it said, adding that average margins were between three and four percent.
Other changes noted by the report, the fourth in the bank's series of annual surveys, included increased availability of telephone banking, an increase of 23 percent in the number of reported investments by "business angels" and a 38 percent increase in the value of these investments.
Small firms remain concerned by late payment of trade debt despite the introduction of a British standard on payment, although "problems sometimes reflect a lack of attention to credit management by small businesses themselves".
And technology-based firms may have particular difficulty in raising finance "they need at seed, start-up and early stages".
For smaller firms seeking to enter export markets, the most important issue is the availability of focused information and advice, the bank said, adding it intends to further explore this issue during 1997.
Elizabeth Forsyth, former aide to Polly Peck Plc head Asil Nadir, left court on Friday still awaiting the outcome of her appeal against a money-laundering conviction but enjoying her first taste of freedom in 10 months.
The London Court of Appeal reserved judgment her appeal after a two-day hearing. Forsyth, 60, spent the last 10 months in jail after being found guilty last year on two counts of dishonestly handling a total of 400,000 pounds ($640,000).
She was freed on bail on Thursday when the court quashed her original five-year sentence, which it said was disproportionate, and concluded she had already served long enough in prison.
But after the conclusion of Forsyth's appeal and arguments by the prosecution that the conviction should stand, the court said it could not make an immediate ruling on whether it would also quash the conviction which would clear Forsyth.
"We desire to reserve our judgment in this matter...we will give our decision as soon as we can," Lord Justice Beldam told the court. The three judges said they were unable to give an immediate result as the appeal had raised complex issues.
The prosecution said the money Forsyth was convicted of handling had been stolen by Nadir from fruits-to-electronics firm Polly Peck, which collapsed in 1990 under massive debts.
Nadir still faces fraud and theft charges in Britain after he fled to his native northern Cyprus in 1993, jumping bail of 3.5 million pounds.
Forsyth's barrister, Geoffrey Robertson, argued during the appeal hearing that her conviction was unsafe on a number of grounds, including the fact that Nadir had not been questioned via a video-link from northern Cyprus and the money Forsyth had transferred in Geneva was not in fact stolen.
"It involves so many complex issues of law it was inevitable that judgement should be reserved," Peter Krivinskas, Forsyth's lawyer, told Reuters after the judge's announcement.
Krivinskas said the appeal was a case "which could set legal precendent," adding that it was difficult to gauge how the appeal had been received by the court. "We don't want to tempt providence," he said.
Forsyth, who on Thursday described her period in jail as "an experience," told Reuters she would be returning her mother's home. "I'm going to go home and just relax for the weekend. I enjoy the countryside and will go for a long walk," she added.
Her 90-year-old mother, Margaret Macalpine, was in court to hear the second day of the appeal. She told Reuters outside the courtroom she had been "stunned" when her daughter had been released. "We just couldn't take it in. We were very excited," she said, adding the telephone had not stopped ringing since.
"I've had a quiet time while she was in prison. It's going to be hectic now," she said, adding that Forsyth had many friends who had supported her throughout.
Lawyers said the appeal court's judgement could take as long as a month to be decided.
Electronic components group Premier Farnell's criticism of BZW over a profits warning has again thrust the investment banking arm of British banking giant Barclays Plc into an unwelcome spotlight.
Premier chief executive Howard Poulson's suggestion that its stockbroker had mishandled a Premier Farnell profits warning on Wednesday is damaging in the short-term. But it may not have longer term implications.
"Who's to say? Everybody has occasional problems with client relationships," a banking analyst at a rival firm told Reuters.
BZW's problems with Premier follow another embarrassing episode for the bank, which is building up its investment banking, over a takeover defence for British regional electricity company Northern Electric.
The Takeover Panel, which polices mergers and acquisitions, is investigating BZW's role in the failed defence against U.S. energy group CE Electric, concentrating on the late disclosure by the firm of a 250,000 pound ($405,000) discretionary fee clause.
Rival corporate financiers said the fee fiasco, which led to an extension of CE's offer for Northern and the loss of the electricity company's independence by the slimmest of margins, would make potential BZW clients think twice and lead others to reassess their relationship.
There does not appear to have been any immediate fall-out, but industry sources point out such moves do not happen overnight. "It has been damaging (to BZW) but it will be even more so if they lose a client as a result," one said.
BZW has made little comment on the Northern affair except to say it acted in good faith and did not break any rules. Earlier this month Barclays's chairman said it would bounce back.
"BZW has a very strong underlying business and I am quite confident it can overcome temporary setbacks of this kind," chairman Andrew Buxton said.
The investment bank has also played down the current troubles with Premier Farnell. In a statement released on Thursday it said it had decided to advise its client to issue a statement only after a brief meeting with its analysts.
They had decided that despite despite a "relatively small percentage profits downgrade for the year 1996-97...the share price might react adversely". A statement had therefore been prepared as quickly as possible with the company, and had been agreed by its board of directors, BZW said.
Premier's Poulson was quoted in British newspapers on Friday as having said the profits warning, which pushed the shares down 25 percent in two days, had been "extremely badly handled". BZW had reversed a view it had given only 10 days before, when it had said a warning was not needed, he said.
Poulson did not say whether the company would end its relationship with its brokers but banking sources said the two sides were still in talks on the matter on Friday.
One financier, who declined to be named, stressed it was premature to blame BZW until it became clear exactly how detailed earlier talks with Premier had been.
"The crucial thing is what was discussed 10 days ago," he said, adding it would have been better off consulting its banking adviser rather than its broker in the first place.
As the first results of the combined Premier Farnell, which merged last year, would be "super-sensitive", even an eight percent fall in forecast profits was something which should have been disclosed, he said.
Morgan Stanley's surprise merger with Dean Witter Discover will create a more competitive force in the European investment banking market.
"Other banks will look at this and think they have got a stronger competitor than they had before," a banking analyst at one European firm told Reuters on Wednesday.
Earlier the two U.S. firms said they had agreed to form a financial giant called Morgan Stanley, Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co, with a market capitalisation of $21 billion.
Both U.S. and European investment banks have been pushing for more business in continental Europe and Britain, but analysts pointed out the merger would give Morgan Stanley's European aspirations considerable backing.
Not only would it increase the amount of capital at the firm's disposal for building its European presence, Dean Witter's U.S. retail network could also provide an additional distribution network for Morgan Stanley products.
The firms stressed there would be little overlap as a result of the merger, although they did not specify if there would be any staff cuts. A Morgan Stanley spokesman in London said he could not comment on the implications for the firm in Europe.
A Dean Witter official said it was still early days. "We've only just seen the news. It was kept extremely quiet," Graham Elliot, sales manager at Dean Witter International told Reuters.
Elliot said Dean Witter employs about 120 people in London, with around 35 working in institutional equities sales. This business was, he said, consistently profitable and had been expanding. "We talk to over 300 institutions," he said.
The firm already has significant placing power and its European business is extremely focused, he added.
Dean Witter, founded in 1924, has a presence on London futures and options exchange LIFFE, but it was not immediately clear how its operations there would be merged.
In Eurobonds, there will be no immediately obvious gains to Morgan Stanley. It has led 16 international bond issues deals worth $2.5 billion this year, putting it in 14th place in the league table compiled by Capital DATA Bondware.
Dean Witter is not active in the Eurobond market, while in 1996 Morgan Stanley ranked fifth in the league table.
Banking sources said the merger would be largely complementary in London, adding that the firms would have to search fairly hard to find room for cutting staff.
"But they don't usually look to take people on in this sort of situation," one said.
Morgan Stanley, founded in 1935, employs around 2,000 people in its Canary Wharf headquarters in the docklands area in east London and has just over 2,500 employees in Europe as a whole. Dean Witter's London offices are in the Broadgate development to the north of London's financial heartland.
Some said there could be a fall-out of key personnel if there was a significant change in corporate culture or a management restructuring of the European operation.
But the idea of a merger is not new to Morgan Stanley, which in 1994 engaged in unsuccessful talks with British merchant bank S.G. Warburg. Warburgs was later bought by Swiss Bank Corp.
A joint statement by Morgan Stanley and Dean Witter detailed the new senior management structure but gave no indication of the position of Morgan Stanley's executive chairman in Europe Sir David Walker or other senior European personnel.
Morgan Stanley insiders in London said the first they had heard of the merger was an address by Richard Fisher, the firm's chairman, over the internal communications system.
Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, part of the giant Deutsche Bank group, has frozen the personal assets of fund manager Peter Young as a probe into suspected irregularities in three of its funds continues.
"We have obtained an injunction against Peter Young in order to freeze his assets," a spokesman for Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Deutsche's investment banking arm, told Reuters on Thursday.
The injunction was obtained jointly with the Royal Bank of Scotland, trustee for the two funds managed by 38-year-old Young, who has been suspended and was on Wednesday reported to be at his home in Amersham, west of London.
The DMG spokesman confirmed a newspaper report that the injunction also covered the assets of a company called Russ Oil &amp; Technology, but declined to give any further details.
On Monday trading in three European funds -- the 788 million stg ($1.24 billion) MG European Growth Trust, the 134 million stg MG Europa and 445 million stg Dublin-listed MG European Capital Growth -- was suspended pending investigation.  
This is being undertaken unofficially by British investments watchdog IMRO, along with the company, and centres on the valuations of holdings of unquoted and pre-listed (those to be quoted within a year) stocks within the funds.
While few details of the alleged irregularities have emerged, a complex web which includes Swedish crown-denominated warrants in a Canadian mining company and shares in obscure Norwegian firms is beginning to surface.
The Financial Times said on Thursday the investigation into the Morgan Grenfell funds followed a Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) examination in April of a London-based broker.
This led it to look at the funds managed by Young and it had then made contact with IMRO, which had kept a "watching brief" on the funds until last week, the FT added.
The funds are due to resume trading on Thursday after Deutsche Bank said on Tuesday it would meet liabilities related to any irregularities that might be identified. The bank also said the prices at which the funds trade should not be hit.
On Tuesday it emerged Deutsche Bank had injected between 150 and 200 million stg into the funds, buying some of the securities for its own account to protect investors' interests.  
Despite this, fund managers say many of the 90,000 investors are expected to bail out of the funds when the suspension on them is lifted because of a loss of confidence. The full scale of the flight from the funds will not be known until later.
Analysts have already said that despite Deutsche's attempts to move quickly to limit damage at the British fund management subsidiary, its credibility and earnings are likely to be hit.
The impact on the asset management business will only become clear once the extent of investors' reaction is known.
But while the problems are confined to only three funds run by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, the embarrassing and potentially damaging incident comes at a time when Germany's biggest bank is attempting to stamp its authority on the highly competitive world of global investment banking.
Taking on the tough competition of Wall Street firms in a bid to become a premier global investment house has involved a high-profile, and reportedly costly, recruitment drive to ensure the bank has the top people. At one stage this led to a threat of court action for poaching by rival ING Barings.  
Some banking sources say Deutsche Bank's own reputation should not be tarnished by investigations into the funds, adding its swift action and the bank's top-rating by credit rating firms should ensure there is little long-term damage.
But other firms are unlikely to show the bank any mercy and will do their best to capitalise on its current predicament.  
Stewart Armer, manager of MG Europa Fund was meanwhile suspended from his duties on Wednesday evening following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules. He has been replaced by Julian Johnston, head of the European equities team which includes UK equities.
Trading in the three European funds was suspending on Monday pending an investigation into possible irregularities, which is being undertaken officially by British investments watchdog IMRO. Last night, MGAM won a High Court injunction freezing the personal assets of fund manager Peter Young.
While few details of the alleged irregularities have emerged, a complex web which includes Swedish crown-denominated warrants in a Canadian mining company and shares in minor, unlisted Norwegian firms is beginning to surface.
The Financial Times newspaper said on Thursday that the investigation into the Morgan Grenfell funds followed a Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) examination in April of a London-based broker.
Members of Britain's third largest building society, the Woolwich, on Tuesday voted overwhelmingly in favour of ditching the mortgage lender's 150-year-old mutual status in favour of becoming a publicly listed bank.
After a special general meeting the proposals, which will give individual members a share windfall worth an average 1,200 pounds ($1,961), were approved by more than 95 percent of both the savers and borrowers who voted.
"...We probably weren't too surprised but it's pleasant that our members feel exactly the same way because quite frankly we've put a lot of thought into trying to get this right," said John Stewart, Woolwich chief executive.
Last month the Woolwich said the handout of at least 450 shares to qualifying members would go to around 2.57 million people, including qualifying members and pensioners.
Around 1,200 members, many unhappy with the conversion, turned up at the meeting but the vote was decided by a large postal vote.
Stewart told Reuters that Woolwich Plc, as it will be known when the 3.0 billion pound flotation goes ahead in July, wanted to offer "a full range of personal financial services" and planned to expand into areas such as pensions.
"That's an area we will either grow into organically or we might make an acquisition..." he said, adding that the group was "a bit light in weight" in other areas such as life assurance and unit trusts.
He did not rule out the possibility of acquisitions to expand the Woolwich's business, but he stressed that if they happened these were likely to be friendly mergers, not hostile takeovers. "The Woolwich's history is as a white knight, most people come to us because someone else is threatening them."
Stewart said the Woolwich, founded in 1847 in south London and set to become a FTSE-100 company and one of Britain's 10 largest banks, would also press ahead with building up relatively high-margin business in France and Italy.
He said the Woolwich would not be looking at other European countries unless "it was the right opportunity" because it was already established and doing very well in France and Italy.
But there are plans to develop so-called "telebanking" and electronic banking, the latter probably starting this year and telephone banking in 1998.
The Woolwich is one of four building societies planning stock market flotations during 1997. The others are Britain's biggest mortgage lender, the Halifax, the Alliance &amp; Leicester and Northern Rock.
Some members protested at the Woolwich's plans to shed its mutual status -- where the building society is owned by its savers and borrowers -- in favour of being a publicly listed company with shareholders who expect dividends.
A number argued that this would reduce the favourable savings rates which building societies have traditionally paid compared with their bank counterparts and increase make loans to house-buyers more expensive.
But Stewart said this would not be the case as Britain's increasingly competitive financial services market and the economies of scale from conversion meant the Woolwich would have to offer not only top quality service but also competitive lending and savings rates.
Stewart told the meeting that Woolwich members should not "get too hung up about being a bank", adding it had no intention of moving into commercial lending, international lending or investment banking but would continue to focus on housing finance and retail savings.
Britain's opposition Labour party has no plans to revolutionise the regulatory structure governing the financial services industry if it wins the election, which the ruling Conservative government must call by May.
"We are talking about a developmental process - reform rather than revolution," Mike O'Brien, Labour's shadow economic secretary, told Reuters in a telephone interview.
O'Brien said Labour planned a number of changes, the most obvious being a shift in Britain's regulatory structure whereby top regulator the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) would merge with the existing Self-Regulatory Organisations (SROs).
At present the SIB supervises these "frontline regulators" which authorise firms to conduct investment business, monitor them, handle complaints and punish rule-breakers. O'Brien believes this system to be overly bureaucratic and expensive.
"What we have to do is to put in place a system that is flexible enough to adapt the changes in the market. We've got a rapidly changing global market out there and we have to have a regulator in Britain that can respond quickly," he said.
But Labour does not intend setting up an equivalent to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which O'Brien said would not be appropriate to Britain. "As soon as the SEC phones, you phone your lawyer -- we want a system where if you have a problem you phone the regulator," he added.
Labour also intends altering the nature of regulation in Britain's all-important financial services sector. "We'd rather have four rules that worked than 400 which tried to catch every eventuality but just succeeded in confusing everyone."
And consultation is king when it comes to Labour's approach to regulation, including the Bank of England's future as a regulator, an unresolved area requiring more industry input.
This process is likely to last more than a year and Labour would state its own view on the issue before it was completed.
Labour is also talking to industry participants about the provision of financial services to people on low pay.
"We have to find a means by which there can be continued sale of financial services products of a good quality to lower income groups," he said. This has to happen without sacrificing quality of advice while reducing the regulatory burden involved.
Discussions have so far been fairly informal but firms have been to him and assisted by giving opinions and advice and O'Brien is confident this approach will prove a success.
"We believe the City has a major contribution to make in terms of our thoughts on how these issues can be resolved. I've been tremendously encouraged by the response so far."
Rather than "firing from the hip", Labour has adopted a cautious approach which will ultimately ensure "a sensible policy which can command support in the City."
O'Brien points out that working with the City -- shorthand for London's financial services sector -- is crucial because the sector produces 18 percent of GDP and employs around three-and-a-half million people.
He denied suggestions that altering the structure that has evolved from the Financial Services Act of 1986 will lead to in-fighting among the SROs and less effective supervision.
For within the new regulatory organisation, likely still to be called the Securities and Investments Board, "there will always be a place for good regulators".
O'Brien said he could not give a timescale for the changes as this would depend on other legislation Labour would enact if it forms a government, but they would come within five years.
A clear distinction will remain between the professional and the retail markets under Labour with a "lighter touch" in the wholesale area, dominated by the principle of "caveat emptor", and a greater degree of openness in the retail area.
O'Brien said under Labour there would be "a much more arm's length approach" with minimum political interference in the work of the regulator and confidence in the watchdog's ability.
Lawyers acting for Peter Young, the fund manager suspended last week by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), said on Monday there were no grounds for allegations of criminality and there had been no such allegation in the proceedings which had been served on him.
"There is no allegation of criminality in the proceedings which have been served on Peter Young and there would be no grounds whatsoever for any such allegation," solicitors Peters &amp; Peters said in a statement.
Young was suspended when MGAM, a subsidiary of German banking giant Deutsche Bank AG, said it had found "suspected irregularities" in three of its funds, two of which were managed by him.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen after MGAM and fund trustee Royal Bank of Scotland obtained an injunction, has not been available for comment.
Trading in the funds was halted last Monday but resumed on Thursday after a 180 million pounds ($280.7 million) cash injection by Deutsche Bank and reassurances that investors would not lose out.
The problems centre on the valuation of the high proportion of unlisted high-technology stocks held in the funds. They are being investigated by British investments watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO).
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO), which prosecutes major financial crimes has taken no official action. It has been in contact with IMRO, but has so far only been kept briefed on developments and denies a criminal investigation is underway.
The probe into what took place within MGAM is widely expected to take some time, with a complex web of holdings and companies around the world to be unravelled.
Both MGAM and IMRO have drafted in forensic accountants to look into the fund management business of the three funds, MGAM has enlisted Ernst &amp; Young and IMRO Deloitte Touche.
MGAM has also appointed law firm Slaughter &amp; May to help untangle a labyrinth of investments. Slaughter &amp; May confirmed its appointment but would not comment on the investigation.
The fall-out of the episode for Deutsche Bank continued on Monday with the news from credit rating agency Moody's that it is looking at the bank's rare and treasured triple-A credit rating in the light of the MGAM situation.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the bank's investment banking arm, said redemptions from the funds had dropped by over half on Monday compared to the 83 million pounds redeemed last Friday and the 110 million pounds which flooded out last Thursday.
"Just under 39 million pounds was redeemed today," DMG spokesman James Murray told Reuters. "As expected the redemptions have slowed down significantly. There is still enough cash left in the funds."
"What we are seeing is a stabilisation."
He said there had been just over 300 million pounds in the funds after the Deutshe cash injection and there would be sufficient cash.if redemptions continued to drop.
Murray confirmed that investors would be compensated, but that the amount would only be decided after the investigation. "If compensation is found to be due then it will be paid by us," he said, adding that it would be calculated by an independent accountant appointed by IMRO.
He said the preliminary part of MGAM's investigation would take between four and six weeks. ($1=.6412 Pound)
Britain's opposition Labour party said on Monday that it believed problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) could have been uncovered earlier and warned other financial institutions to be more vigilant.
"The preliminary indications are the problem was not determined as soon as it should have been," said Alistair Darling, shadow chief secretary to the Treasury.
"Alarm bells ought to be ringing in all major institutions. They should ask themselves if something similar could have happened," Darling said in a telephone interview.
Trading in the three funds, which were worth an estimated 1.4 billion pounds ($2.18 billion), was suspended last week when MGAM, part of the giant Deutsche Bank group, disclosed suspected irregularities in the funds and began a probe.
The problems centre on the valuation of the high proportion of speculative unlisted high-technology stocks held in the funds.
Trading in the three funds resumed last Thursday after a 180 million pound cash injection by Deutsche.
Peter Young, the fund manager of two of the funds, was suspended and an injunction obtained by MGAM and Royal Bank of Scotland, trustee of the funds, to freeze his assets.
An in-depth probe spearheaded by investment watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) is underway, and it has brought in accountants to work out how much compensation may be due to the 90,000 investors in the funds.
Darling said the problems at MGAM showed the regulatory system was not perfect and there were still problems to be addressed, both by regulators and businesses.
"Good regulatory sense and good business sense go hand-in-hand," Darling said, adding that every large organisation should be asking itself if similar irregularities could occur within their own structures.
While the Labour party stood by its proposals to make the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) directly responsible for regulating Britain's financial community, it would not make any recommendations on the latest episode until IMRO had completed its investigation into the matter.
"The central question which IMRO needs to look at is how was it possible for these problems to arise," Darling said.
The fact that a succession of such problems were blamed on a so-called "rogue trader" or dealer was also a concern, as it raised the question of how those charged with compliance or those in senior management could miss such dealings.
"I'm concerned that when things go wrong the finger is pointed at a rogue activity. Ideally we want a system where it is simply not possible for one or two people to stray off the path," Darling said.
He also said the role of trustees of funds was a matter of concern, adding it was important to find a way of ensuring they are not only independent but constantly vigilant.
The role of a trustee is to represent the interests of investors and to ensure a fund is managed according to its mandate.
"The public needs to be confident that these funds are properly managed," he said.
($1=.6412 Pound)
Lawyers acting for Peter Young, the fund manager suspended last week by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), said on Monday there were no grounds for allegations of criminality and there had been no such allegation in the proceedings which had been served on him.
"There is no allegation of criminality in the proceedings which have been served on Peter Young and there would be no grounds whatsoever for any such allegation," solicitors Peters &amp; Peters said in a statement.  
Young was suspended when MGAM, a subsidiary of German banking giant Deutsche Bank AG, said it had found "suspected irregularities" in three of its funds, two of which were managed by him.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen after MGAM and fund trustee Royal Bank of Scotland obtained an injunction, has not been available for comment.
Trading in the funds was halted last Monday but resumed on Thursday after a 180 million pounds ($280.7 million) cash injection by Deutsche Bank and reassurances that investors would not lose out.  
The problems centre on the valuation of the high proportion of unlisted high-technology stocks held in the funds. They are being investigated by British investments watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO).
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO), which prosecutes major financial crimes has taken no official action. It has been in contact with IMRO, but has so far only been kept briefed on developments and denies a criminal investigation is underway.  
"Weekend reports that the SFO was about to get involved were wholly speculative. The director must have reasonable grounds to suspect that serious or complex fraud offences have taken place," SFO spokesman James O'Donoghue told Reuters on Monday.
The probe into what took place within MGAM is widely expected to take some time, with a complex web of holdings and companies around the world to be unravelled.
Both MGAM and IMRO have drafted in forensic accountants to look into the fund management business of the three funds, MGAM has enlisted Ernst &amp; Young and IMRO Deloitte Touche.  
MGAM has also appointed law firm Slaughter &amp; May to help untangle a labyrinth of investments. Slaughter &amp; May confirmed its appointment but would not comment on the investigation.
The fall-out of the episode for Deutsche Bank continued on Monday with the news from credit rating agency Moody's that it is looking at the bank's rare and treasured triple-A credit rating in the light of the MGAM situation.
And investment bank Salomon Brothers said the worry that Deutsche Bank might return to its accident prone image of the early 1990s may be the most serious concern stemming from problems at the bank's asset management arm.  
But Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the bank's investment banking arm, said redemptions from the funds had dropped by over half on Monday compared to the 83 million pounds redeemed last Friday and the 110 million pounds which flooded out last Thursday.
"Just under 39 million pounds was redeemed today," DMG spokesman James Murray told Reuters. "As expected the redemptions have slowed down significantly. There is still enough cash left in the funds."
"What we are seeing is a stabilisation," he added.  
He said there had been just over 300 million pounds in the funds after the Deutshe cash injection and if redemptions continued to drop there would be sufficient cash.
Murray confirmed that investors would be compensated, but that the amount would only be decided after the investigation. "If compensation is found to be due then it will be paid by us," he said, adding that it would be calculated by an independent accountant appointed by IMRO.
He said the preliminary part of MGAM's investigation would take between four and six weeks. ($1=.6412 Pound)
National Westminster Bank Plc said on Monday it would complete an internal probe into a 50 million pound ($81 million) trading hole as quickly as possible.
"Our internal inquiry is continuing...we are trying to do it as quickly as possible," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters.
But the bank, which on Friday revealed mispricing errors in the interest rate options book at its investment banking arm NatWest Markets, is also employing an outside firm.
"We are using internal resources and also external advisors," the NatWest official said, although she declined to say which firm had been appointed to help the bank unravel what went wrong.
The investigation, which will include a thorough review of NatWest's control systems, is expected to take several weeks.
British financial regulator the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA), which licenses options traders, has been informed of the errors. But NatWest would not say whether it had meetings with the watchdog over the weekend.
"We are keeping our regulators informed," the NatWest spokeswoman said. SFA officials were not immediately available for comment but the Bank of England, which regulates banks generally, on Sunday said it would be looking at what happened.
Options are contracts giving buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price on a set date in the future.
Banking sources said mispricing was a general term which did not necessarily imply there had been any fraudulent intention but could have resulted from pricing errors.
But they added that if such errors occurred on an on-going basis, it would suggest that the trader involved had been aware of a discrepancy between actual and book price of the derivatives in which he was dealing.
Banking sources named the interest rate options trader at the centre of the affair as Kyriacos Papouis, who now works for U.S. securities firm Bear Stearns, but NatWest would not confirm this.
Papouis, who left NatWest Markets last year, could not be reached at Bear Stearns in London and the firm said it was referring all calls to the trader to its press office in New York.
A spokeswoman there was not immediately available for comment.
Bankers questioned why it had taken NatWest several months to uncover the mispricings, which it said had taken place over a period during 1996 but had only come to light in the last few days.
The NatWest spokeswoman said this time lapse was one aspect of the affair it would be addressing in its internal probe. She said the inquiry would also aim to uncover the motivation of whoever was responsible for what had occurred.
In addition to reporting one trader to the SFA, NatWest said it had suspended a senior trader, named by banking sources as Neil Dodgson, for "failure to supervise", pending the conclusion of its probe.
A spokesman for Dodgson said he could not comment on the case but would co-operate fully with any investigations.
While the banking community awaited further details of precisely what precipitated the 50 million pound loss, NatWest's shares were marked lower, dropping 41 pence to 717.5 pence by early afternoon.
Around 24 pence of this fall was attributable to the impact of the shares going ex-dividend while the sector as a whole was weaker following the announcement of HSBC Holdings' results. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
British investment bank Close Brothers said on Monday its enlarged corporate finance business was exceeding expectations and helping strong fee earnings.
"The corporate finance business has gone much better than we ever dreamt," Rod Kent, Close Brothers' managing director, told Reuters.
The group earlier today announced a 30 percent increase in first half pre-tax profits to 28.2 million pounds ($45.8 million), from 21.7 million the previous year.
Close Brothers enlarged its corporate finance division last May when it bought Hill Samuel's corporate finance department from Britain's Lloyds TSB Group Plc.
It said the integration had been very successful, with no material loss of clients or staff and had led to a leap in activity and profits in the corporate finance area. Kent said Close Brothers now had "well over 80 quoted clients", adding it was focusing on giving advice to growth companies.
"It is quite clear from the figures that we have got off to a good start on our corporate finance side," he said, adding the majority of an increase in fees and commissions from 9.0 million stg to 19 million stg had come from this quarter.
Kent was also upbeat about Close Brothers' other main business areas, including other aspects of what it calls "City Merchant Banking".
He said the asset finance division had grown to new records in advances and profits. The division accounted for 41 percent of operating profits during the period, down from 44 percent for the same period a year earlier.
And WINS, the former Winterflood Securities market-making arm, had "a very good half" retaining its position in the market place where it benefited particularly from high levels of activity in smaller company stocks.
Kent said WINS' small retail order gilts business had moved into profitability during the period, adding that worries about an order driven system were unlikely to materialise.
Market-making accounted for 33 percent of operating profits during the period, down from 34 percent, while merchant banking accounted for 26 percent, up from 22 percent. Kent said he was happy with the overall mix of business.
Within the merchant banking arm, Kent said the insurance premium finance division PROMPT was "going like a train" and the group was making steady progress in its other specialist business.
Asked about the likelihood of Close Brothers making acquisitions to grow its business, Kent said the firm would be patient when it came to buying other companies.
"We have clearly signalled our intentions to get something on the investment management side," he said, adding that on the basis of the high valuations of investment management companies at the moment, it would be difficult to buy.
And Kent said he was not worried by the trend for smaller merchant banks such as Close Brothers to be gobbled up by larger expanding foreign investment banks.
"I have never been concerned about it. Our best asset is our performance. Ownership is in the public arena," he said.
Close Brothers said it would continue to see organic growth in its activities but warned the forthcoming election in Britain could cause a temporary slow-down in some of its businesses.
The group announced an increased interim dividend of 3.8 pence, up from 3.2 pence, while earnings per share for the period rose 21 percent to 15.31 pence from 12.64 pence. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
British hotels and betting group Ladbroke Group Plc announced on Tuesday the closure of its property arm and sale of its remaining properties to allow it to concentrate on core areas.
"The closure of the property division will allow us to focus upon our core businesses of hotels and betting and gaming," said Brian Wallace, Ladbroke's group finance director.
Ladbroke said the cost of the closure would be 52.3 million pounds ($84.4 million) and would mainly cover losses arising on the sale of property and a provision "to write down the remaining portfolio to net realisable value upon an accelerated sale".
The firm said its 1996 accounts, due to be released on Thursday, would also include a non-operating exceptional charge of 17.6 million pounds "mainly representing losses on disposals of investment properties previously announced during 1996".
Analysts said that although the cost was larger than expected, the closure and property sales removed one element of uncertainty for the group during 1997.
Dresdner Kleinwort Benson's Greg Freehely said in a research note that Ladbroke's 1996 results would now include exceptional items totalling more than 100 million pounds, including property disposals and closure of the division.
The investment bank said other exceptional items were the settlement of a rent dispute at the Paris Hilton and a settlement to cover an adjustment on the price of DIY retailer Texas Homecare which Ladbroke sold to J. Sainsbury Plc two years ago.
Ladbroke is expected to report a profit rise of around 30 percent for 1996, with analysts forecasting pre-tax, pre-exceptional profits in the 155-165 million pound range, against 121.3 million pounds a year ago. Net dividend is forecast at between 6.0 and 6.2 pence per share, compared with 6.0 pence.
Freehely said the discount on the sale of properties to Britain's Minerva Plc for 25 million pounds was larger than anticipated. But he adde that "the decision to provide for the closure of the division and take further write downs is the correct one...".
The portfolio of around 10 commercial and residential properties sold to Minerva had a book value of about 34.6 million pounds and were mostly in London and southern England.
Ladbroke said its property arm had also sold a stake in a Boston office building to HN Gorin Inc for $23.0 million in cash, about equal to book value.
It also expects to make a further U.S. property disposal this week for about $13 million and use the proceeds from the sales to pay down debt.
Ladbroke said the net book value of commercial property at January 1, 1996 was 373.4 million pounds. A property analyst at one British firm said it was no great surprise that Ladbroke had finally withdrawn from the property market as it had not performed in this sector for some time.
"They used to be good at what they did in property, but they rather lost their way," he said. "They are retrenching into
Canada's TrizecHahn Corp and German businessman Dieter Bock on Wednesday unveiled a European property alliance which analysts said underlined increasing confidence in the market.
"This shows further faith being expressed in the UK and European property market," a property analyst at one major European investment bank said.
Toronto-based TrizecHahn, which has $6.0 billion in assets and $1.2 billion in uncommitted capital, said it would buy British and German property projects from Bock's Advanta Management AG for around $147 million.
It said it would pay for the acquisitions by issuing subordinate voting shares to Bock, as well as by assuming development liabilities and through construction financing.
Steve Mallen, head of research at property consultants Knight Frank, praised the timing of the move, saying: "This is a wise strategic move, I think their timing is perfect."
Bock will become president of TrizecHahn Europe and a director of the company, with an equity stake of around four percent. At the same time Bock announced he would resign as non-executive deputy chairman of Lonrho Plc and also as a director of the British- based trading and hotels conglomerate.
"The opportunity at TrizecHahn will demand my full attention," Bock said.
Both parties said the partnership represented an important strategic move, reflecting its commitment to expanding outside North America. Under the terms of the deal, which is expected to close in April, TrizecHahn's existing European operations will be merged with its new German and British development projects under Bock's leadership.
Peter Munk, TrizecHahn's chairman and chief executive, told a telephone news conference he was excited by the deal, which would allow the marriage of the firm's asset base and experience with Bock's "experience, presence and credibility" in Europe.
Munk said the deal would widen TrizecHahn's horizons beyond Eastern Europe to the whole of the European market. He said the company's involvement would encompass both development and investment in property in Europe.
He had not done business with Bock before, he said, but the two had become good friends out of a common interest in gold mining.
Bock said he was bringing in expertise built up in Europe and would strengthen the European management capacity.
The projects being taken over by TrizecHahn were a commercial property, Number 1 Poultry in London's City financial district, two commercial developments in Berlin, one in Dresden and a Baltic Sea project.
TrizecHahn, one of North America's largest publicly traded real estate developers, was formed from the merger last November of Horsham Corporation and Trizec Corporation Ltd.
It owns, develops and manages office buildings and regional shopping centres in the U.S., Canada and Central Europe.
A proposed reform of Britain's state pensions system would revolutionise the financial services industry, market participants said on Thursday.
The ruling Conservative government on Wednesday unveiled proposals which aim to prevent huge burdens falling on future taxpayers by making workers take responsibility for providing for their old age.
Roger Taylor, deputy chairman of composite insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance, described the plans as "the biggest shift in financial services in the last 50 years".
Taylor said it would encourage other governments to follow suit, adding that if the proposals were enacted they would start to generate additional business in three to four years time.
"For the industry as a whole it is good news," Tony Baker, deputy director general of the Association of British Insurers (ABI), told Reuters.
Prime Minister John Major must call an election by May and the opposition Labour Party is well ahead in the opinion polls.
Labour wants to retain the basic state pension and develop a new range of second pensions for those not already in occupational pension schemes.
But the banking and life insurance industry is gearing up for change whatever the outcome of the election, arguing that demographic changes mean additional pension provisions are essential for economic and social stability beyond 2000.
Banking analyst John Leonard of U.S. investment bank Salomon Brothers agreed that the British government's decision to address the problem was an opportunity for the industry.
"Anything giving rise to privately managed assets must introduce interesting products for banks and the insurance sector," he said.
He said a large additional pool of privately managed money to fund the pensions was a particularly big opportunity for the "large volume, efficiently managed providers with good distribution networks."
But the shift from state to privately held pensions could also spawn a major marketing war between the firms most likely to win business.
This in itself would be costly, at least at the outset. The start of any such scheme would be particularly important as once individuals had chosen a provider with which to invest their pension contributions, it would be difficult for other companies to persuade them to move.
Baker said there would still be plenty of business for existing players in the market which were not able to sell the new scheme, labelled Basic Pension Plus.
He said there would have to be regulations governing matters such as maximum charges, transferability, reporting and investment returns, while not all insurance companies would necessarily be included on the approved list of providers.
While the desirability of involvement for companies would depend on the rules set out by the government, Baker said the scheme could lead to further consolidation in the industry, where only the big, efficient providers could meet the criteria.
He said the scheme could hit smaller players and other elements of the industry, particularly independent financial advisors (IFAs), who could lose out if individuals chose to top up basic contributions with their main pensions provider rather than other companies.
"The need for a middle man might be much less than at the present time," he said.
Baker added that the government had underlined that it wanted simplicity and lower costs to result from the changes, factors which he said would mean individuals "buying" their pensions rather than being sold them.
The importance of the move was underlined by Royal &amp; Sun Alliance's Taylor, who said self-provision would become the biggest single transaction an individual would make.
Mike Blackburn, chief executive of Britain's Halifax Building Society, said earlier this week that the group would target long-term savings products -- life assurance, pensions and investments -- because of their growth potential.
"With an ageing population and governments unable to look after people as they have historically been able to do in retirement, the requirement on the private individual to provide for the long-term future will be accentuated," Blackburn said.
British estate agency and financial products group Hambro Countrywide Plc has capitalised on the housing market recovery and is prepared for further growth.
The company said on Thursday it had turned around a pre-tax loss of 3.9 million pounds for 1995 into a pre-tax profit of 30.8 million pounds for 1996 and promised there was more to come.
"I think we are only half way there yet...if we get to anything like the volumes that we anticipate this year...the prospects are obviously very exciting," managing director Harry Hill told Reuters. Hill said the British housing market was improving across the country, although there were still regional differences. He said London and the south east were outpacing other areas, but added he did not believe prices would rise unsustainably.
"I suspect it will find a level," he said. "There's an enormous momentum that will probably sustain the market this year and next before it even starts to draw breath," he added.
All the factors were in place for a long, sustained recovery in Britain and within that context house prices would increase.
Hambro Countrywide, which is 52 percent owned by British merchant bank Hambros Plc, also announced that it had broken with tradition and made a move into the burgeoning London market by buying an estate agency and letting business for 7.45 million pounds.
Faron Sutaria &amp; Co has five existing branches in London and plans to expand in the west, south and north west of the capital. "From the middle of this year we will have nine offices under Faron's banner and we would hope in the next two years to have another seven," Hill said. Hambro Countrywide said the entire management team at Faron wanted to stay with the business, adding that the acquisition offered the opportunity to generate additional revenue by offering mortgages and financial services to new clients. Hill does not see the impending British election slowing Hambro Countrywide's business and said a victory for the opposition Labour party could in fact benefit the firm's clients. "I don't think it will make much difference either way," he said.
He said Hambro Countrywide had sold more mortgages and retail financial services during February than in any other month in its history.
And there was no sign of change to the direct correlation between people buying houses and financial products from the group. "Most people want to do most things if they can, easily and comfortably under one roof," Hill said.
While there are a growing number of competitors in the market-place, Hill said he did not see Hambro Countrywide's margins being pinched as a result.
Asked if Hambro Countrywide planned to make any further acquisitions, Hill said "We aren't talking to anyone today". But the group said it was in discussions with a "number of leading law firms" as part of a move to set up a conveyancing operation.
"We believe this will bring significant benefits to all our clients in smoothing and speeding up the home buying process," the group said, adding it expected to open its first centre in April 1997.
As for Hambro Countrywide's own future, chairman Christopher Sporborg said there was little chance of a change in the current shareholding by Hambros.
Shares in Hambro Countrywide, which also announced a final dividend of 1.5 pence to make a total dividend of 2.0 pence, were down 4.0 pence at 1100 GMT at 123.5 pence.
A British firm believes it has developed a computer programme which could prevent other financial firms getting into the sort of situation Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) is currently trying to resolve.
Numerous risk management systems already exist, but Frasin Limited says its Windows-based SOFWIN is the first to address operational risk management rather than financial risk.
"We believe it will prompt senior management to ask the right questions, which will create a more disciplined and controlled environment," Frasin's chief executive Philip Martin told Reuters on Tuesday.
MGAM is attempting to unscramble a complicated web of investments in three of its funds. These led to the funds being temporarily suspended last week after it revealed "suspected irregularities" in the them.
A fund manager for two of the funds was suspended at the same time and had his assets frozen by a High Court injunction.
Ironically, Martin says he took the product to show Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the investment banking arm of Deutsche Bank, some months ago with a view to selling it to them.
He says he will still offer it to the firm, freely admitting that his prospects may have been boosted by publicity surrounding MGAM and a recent fine for fund management firms in the Robert Fleming group over so-called "rat-trading" by a fund manager in a Hong Kong joint venture with Jardine Matheson.
"I have to thank Morgan Grenfell and Jardine Fleming because their timing has been impeccable," he says with a grin.
Martin believes the software could also help banks avoid another Barings situation, where so-called "rogue trader" Nick Leeson, was able to run both the front and back offices, effectively monitoring his own trading.
Leeson is currently serving a long jail sentence in Singapore for fraudulent trading which led to losses of around $1.4 billion and culminated in the blue-blooded bank's collapse.
While Martin admits it will never be possible to eradicate rogue individuals, he says closer monitoring by senior management of all an institution's operations is essential.
If a chief executive, chief financial officer or other top official wants to avoid criticism in the event of a problem within the firm, then a programme such as that offered by Frasin, which is part of the HSBC group, should ensure they have adopted every measure possible to avoid such events.
SOFWIN, which costs 12,000 pounds ($18,640) a year and must be signed up to for three years, takes the institution through a detailed questionnaire, with a possible 3,600 different questions.
The collated results, after any subsidiaries or branches have also been through the process, then gives a clear picture of where any potential weaknesses lie, Martin said. It can also compare the standards of different branches and how they each match up with an "ideal" set-up.
Much of the programme is devoted to dealing activities, as this has been found to be a major area of concern.
"The largest part revolves around dealing activities. I have spoken to senior managers who are scared to death about what their traders are up to," he added.
But however thorough the programme, Martin says the buck stops with senior management and they are the main target of his marketing.
"It takes commitment by senior management. If they are not committed to it (assessing the company's organisational risk), then it's a waste of time. But they are opening themselves up to criticism," he said. ($1=.6436 Pound)
Kyriacos Papouis, the trader allegedly linked to NatWest Markets' 50 million pound ($80 million) options loss, has resigned from U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns.
"We have accepted the resignation of Kyriacos Papouis, an interest rate trader in our derivatives department," a Bear Stearns spokeswoman told Reuters.
"We have conducted a thorough review of his open trading positions and are satisfied that they are all booked and valued properly. We have notified the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) of his resignation," she added.
The spokeswoman declined to give any further details of Papouis' resignation.
Earlier this week, Bear Stearns said Papouis was "on leave, pending further information".
Papouis could not be contacted for comment on Friday.
Papouis left NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank, late last year and moved to Bear Stearns.
Last week NatWest disclosed mispricing errors in its interest rate options book and said it had suspended a senior trader, named by banking sources as Neil Dodgson, for alleged "failure to supervise". It also reported a former options trader, allegedly Papouis, to financial markets watchdog the SFA.
Options are contracts which give buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price on a set date in the future.
The SFA said it had been notified of the NatWest probe into the loss and had opened a file while the Bank of England has said it is cooperating with the SFA.
The episode was especially embarrassing to NatWest coming only days after it announced its 1996 results.
On Thursday, a senior NatWest Markets official said that compared with the size of losses run up from derivatives trading at some other banks, it had got off relatively lightly.
"If that is all it costs us to learn the value of a tight infrastructure, then it could turn out to be a blessing in disguise," Nick Riley was reported by Britain's Press Association agency as saying.
Riley is administrative officer for NatWest Markets' global foreign exchange business. His comments were made during a conversation at a charitable function on Thursday night, banking sources said.
The PA said Riley had pointed out that other banks such as Barings, which crashed in 1995 owing around $1.4 billion as a result of losses run up by Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson, paid far more to find out that their internal controls were inadequate.
But a NatWest spokeswoman distanced the firm from Riley's comments.
"He is not a spokesman for NatWest and his comments are not therefore attributable to the company. This was a personal view," she told Reuters.
A group of U.S. and European firms on Tuesday revealed they had developed a system for money transactions over the Internet.
The team, which includes AT &amp; T Corp Unisource, Apple Computer Inc, Nokia Oy and Mondex UK, will run the project on a pilot basis.
"We have developed protocols for shopping and banking that allow users to pay for electronic services via the Internet," Julian Wilson, Unisource's director of service development told a briefing.
Wilson said he believed the system, involving the transfer of electronic cash from one device to another, was "a world first".
The developers of the system said it was the world's first trial of "an innovative concept for fast and safe money transactions over the Internet" and would use the GSM network for Internet access.
The system aims to allow Internet users to buy services and access information using so-called "smart cards" such as that developed by Mondex the electronic cash-card company.
Wilson said banks were top of the list of possible users for the system, pointing out the economies of internet banking compared to traditional retail banking which has to pay the cost of maintaining a branch network.
"The economic justification for banks is significant," he said, adding that the system would give users a direct connection to their bank and cash could then be issued onto the card.
The initial pilot is being carried out with National Westminster Bank Plc, he said.
As well as banking, another key use for this system was to pay for information, anonymously, on the Internet, without having to reveal credit card details.
Wilson said the project was effectively putting cash registers and ATMs (Automated Teller Machines) onto the Internet.
Users will be able to use handheld network computers, such as Apple's MessagePad 2000 with built-in GSM and Internet access, to make use of the system.
Craig Sears-Black, head of Apple's information appliances division, said "The project is going to be a trial which tells us what the future holds for this type of transaction over the Internet".
He said the protocols developed were the first to make very low cost transactions, such as retrieving restaurant reviews or individual newspaper articles, viable.
In Britain, the trial is teaming up with London listings magazine Time Out, which will sell on-line information on restaurants and entertainment.
It is also going to be connected to a map service provided by Multimedia Mapping which will give users precision maps directly relating to the Time Out information.
Regent Pacific, the Hong-Kong based fund which last month took a three percent stake in Britain's Hambros, said it was reassured by a meeting with chief executive Sir Chips Keswick that its profits would improve.
"It was useful to sit down and spend a little time with them. I left with the impression that the company's profits will improve," Julian Mayo, director of Regent Pacific Corporate Finance in London told Reuters.
A spokesman for British investment bank Hambros Plc declined to comment on the meeting but Mayo said it was "friendly, business-like and constructive."
Regent, often called a "vulture fund," received widespread attention last month when it made the Hambros buy.
Its chief Jim Mellon was widely quoted as saying the bank, one the last few British independent investment banks, was undervalued and undermanaged. He was also reported to have said the bank's shares had been "diabolical" over the last 10 years.
This attack got a cool response from Hambros, which said it would meet Regent but would not otherwise comment on its new shareholder or its intentions.
Mayo said he had gone into the meeting wanting to hear what Hambros' strategy was going forward, how the bank was planning to coninue its policy of rationalisation and restructuring and when shareholders would see the fruits of it.
Asked if he was happy with the answers he received, Mayo said "Yes, in broad terms."
But he was less clear about Regent Pacific's long term aims in buying into Hambros, which like other British merchant banks has been the subject of takeover speculation in the past.
"Our motives are to make a good return from this investment, whether it is short or long term remains to be seen," Mayo said, adding that the group liked to have good relations with a company in which it invests and this was not a one-off meeting.
"We were left with the impression that the door is always open," Mayo said.
Regent Pacific's action had, he said highlighted what a number of analysts had been saying for some time about Hambros' performance. Undervaluation of the shares and discussions with analysts had prompted the decision to buy into Hambros, he said.
He said some analysts thought the bank's shares could rise to between 300 and 325 pence, closer to its potential value.
Hambros shares closed at 260.5 pence on Tuesday, up a penny. There was speculative buying late in August after Regent Pacific's holding became public with the share price reaching a year high of 280 pence.
But talk of a takeover or a possible break-up of the bank was dismissed by analysts at the time as unlikely in the near term, although some said it had a better break-up value.
Mayo said Regent could not launch a bid for Hambros but said a greater holding in the company was "not out of the question," although it would have to notify both the bank and the stock exchange if it did buy a more significant stake.
"Whether we increase our position is something we will have to decide upon," he said.
In 1995 Hambros' pre-tax profits fell to 20.6 million pounds from 37.1 million the year before. Bad debt provisions grew to 36.2 million from 13.5 million pounds during the period.
NatWest Markets is expected to deal firmly with anyone found to have been responsible for its 50 million pound ($80.2 million) loss on interest rate options.
Sackings, demotions and bonus cuts are among the penalties banking sources have suggested NatWest could hand down when it releases a preliminary report into the affair on Thursday.
NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc, revealed the embarrassing hole in its interest rate options book nearly two weeks ago.
A NatWest Markets spokeswoman declined to comment on the precise timing of the early findings of its internal probe, which have been widely expected to emerge this week.
She said she could not comment on a newspaper report suggesting bonuses could be cut but confirmed the results of the inquiry "may have a financial impact on certain individuals".
NatWest has hired accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand and law firm Linklaters &amp; Paines to assist it in finding out how the options "mispricing errors" went unnoticed for so long.
Options are contracts which give buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price on a set date in the future.
A former NatWest trader, widely believed to be Kyriacos Papouis, has been reported by NatWest to British financial markets regulator the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA).
And a senior NatWest trader, Neil Dodgson, has been suspended for allegedly "failing to supervise", pending the outcome of the probe.
Dodgson, who has not spoken about the case, was not immediately available for comment.
Papouis left NatWest in December last year for U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns. He resigned from Bear Stearns last week and has not commented on his role in the NatWest affair. There has been no suggestion there was any personal gain involved, but the affair has raised deep concerns about NatWest's internal risk management.
Bear Stearns last week declined to give any details of the Papouis resignation, except to say it had conducted a thorough review of his open trading positions and was satisfied they were all booked and managed properly.
Britain's SFA has been notified of the NatWest internal inquiry and has opened a file, while the Bank of England has said it is co-operating with SFA.
On Tuesday the Bank of England, which supervises the NatWest group, said it was being kept informed of developments by NatWest.
NatWest Markets said it was undertaking a thorough review of its control systems, both internal and external.
Banking sources and British newspaper reports said this has involved examining the workings of both its interest rate derivatives department and its compliance division.
Jean-Francois Nguyen is head of interest rate derivatives at NatWest Markets. At the time of the mispricing errors, he reported to the then head of debt capital markets Phil Wise.
The Times on Thursday reported that NatWest's computer-based risk models had not been fed with accurate information which would have enabled any excessively risky positions to be identified.
A key question likely to be asked of senior NatWest officials is why the firm did not reveal the loss when it announced its 1996 results only days before it made the surprise announcement.
NatWest said it had brought the loss to the market's attention as soon as it came to light, but some banking sources questioned why the loss had not been picked up when the firm prepared its 1996 accounts.
($ = 0.623 British Pounds)
British investment bank Schroders Plc said on Wednesday it was working towards an improvement in returns from its merchant banking business.
"Our objective is to see...returns from that business improve," Schroders' vice-chairman Peter Sedgwick told Reuters.
He said Schroders had been through a year of "very substantial structural changes" and had built up and invested in its securities business.  
Earlier the group reported pre-tax profits for 1996 of 238.7 million stg, at the top of analyst's expectations and an increase on 197.3 million stg in 1995.
Sedgwick said the investment in securities was not the reason for an increase in costs at Schroders. "The increase in costs is not down to securities, it is across the board," he said.
He said there had been some restructuring of the group's corporate finance business in South East Asia and an expansion of its geographical exposure in continental Europe, particularly Spain and Germany.  
"We have been integrating corporate finance with securities throughout the world...we are looking for what has been taking place in the last year to pay off for us to a greater extent over the next year or two," he added.
But he felt the investment and merchant banking side of the business "has performed reasonably well against the changes in strategy that have been taking place here".
Sedgwick said the bulk of the cost of this strategy change had been borne in 1996. "We would not expect to see the same increase in costs this year," he said.  
Schroders said in its results statement that other factors driving up costs had been increased volumes, the cost of regulation and "not least by competitive conditions for staff".
Sedgwick pointed out that staff costs per employee had risen to 93,300 stg from 78,500 stg the previous year. Schroders' cost/income ratio was 75 percent, compared to 75.4 pct in 1995.
He said Schroders' profits, both pre and post tax, were up by over 20 percent but bonuses had risen slightly below this in total.  
Spiralling bonuses in the industry as a whole were, he said, the result of a battle going on between a number of major investment banking players to become one of the five or six global powerhouses.
"Sooner or later the damage that some will suffer (means) they will withdraw and the cycle will change," he said, adding that Schroders did not count itself among this group.
He said many were desperate to get into asset management, where Schroders posted an improved return in 1996, as they did not have the balanced portfolio Schroders did.
Sedgwick said the firm was an "advisory-relationship type investment bank" and was not heavily dependent on proprietory trading, has a strong balance sheet, no borrowing, cash reserves and a good asset management business.
He said Schroders was not aiming to be a Merrill Lynch or a Goldman Sachs. "It is not our strategy to be in that game."
And commenting on long-standing speculation that Schroders could be involved in a merger or a takeover by a larger firm, Sedgwick said "There is absolutely no intention of changing Schroders as is. We are not up for sale, we are not out for merger, we do not want a big brother and we are not in the acquisition stakes."
"We are not in the business of losing our independence," he said, adding that Schroders would grow organically.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7719
Britain's NatWest Bank revealed on Thursday its multi-million pound derivatives losses were nearly twice as large as first thought and that they began in 1994.
A wide-ranging probe into the loss also led to drastic action, including suspension of four senior employees and the withdrawal of millions of pounds in staff bonuses.
NatWest said the total loss was 90 million pounds ($144 million) but that five million had already been provisioned and eight million had been clawed back by not paying the bonuses, making a loss of 77 million pounds in the accounts. And Martin Owen, chief executive of the NatWest Markets investment banking division, will forego 200,000 of his 500,000 pounds 1996 bonus in a gesture to the industry.
"He has waived his bonus in recognition of his overall responsibility for the business. He believes he has made the gesture as an example to the industry," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters.
Owen said it was unacceptable that the losses, which had resulted from options being wrongly priced systematically but stemmed from an initial interest rate options loss, had not been unearthed earlier. He said the problem came to light as a result of procedural changes to the way trading positions and valuations are checked. "It has gone on (during) a long period; that is clearly unacceptable against the background of incidents in other firms as well. Fortunately, it does seem to be isolated to this area," Owen said. Although his role has come under scrutiny, NatWest's overall head Derek Wanless told Reuters he had complete confidence in Owen but the loss had been a setback for him in one area. The bank would learn lessons and emerge stronger, he added.
The staff suspensions, which have been notified to Britain's financial watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA), followed the suspension of global head of options Neil Dodgson when the problem first came to light nearly two weeks ago.
A former NatWest options trader, Kyriacos Papouis, has also been reported to the SFA, which confirmed it was examining the conduct of all six. NatWest said its requests to interview Papouis had so far been ignored.
The initial findings of NatWest's inquiry, carried out by accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand and law firm Linklaters &amp; Paines, found no flaws in the models used to calculate valuations.
Owen said details of how the mispricings went unnoticed for so long would be examined in the second phase of an internal inquiry.
He could not say if the initial options loss was the result of an individual's actions and could not comment on whether the subsequent mispricings had been intentional. "I don't want to prejudge the second phase of the report because we are really deep into the examination of all the individuals associated with it. The degree to which there was collusion or not is something which is being examined," he said.
But further disciplinary action could follow from the report's second stage, he said.
Those suspended were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets. NatWest stressed these suspensions were normal practice in such cases and did not imply guilt. Peter Hall, President and Chief Operating Officer of NatWest Markets, will temporarily take on the additional responsibilities of Chief Administrative Officer. Vincent Tomasi currently Senior Vice President and Head of US Debt Capital Markets at NatWest Markets in New York will take over as acting Head of Global Debt Derivatives. The bank said that a new management structure it had intended to put into place following its 1996 acquisition of U.S. bond trading house Greenwich Capital and the creation of a global debt markets division would now be accelerated. NatWest is continuing to keep bank regulator the Bank of England closely informed, and the second phase of the inquiry would take place as quickly as possible, concentrating on the role of individuals, Owen said. ($1= 0.626 British Pounds)
NatWest Bank  admitted on Thursday that its multi-million pound derivatives losses totalled nearly twice the amount initially thought and revealed the problem had begun as long ago as December 1994.
As a result of initial findings of a wide-ranging internal probe into the loss, the bank also took drastic action to restore confidence by suspending four senior members of staff and cutting millions of pounds from bonuses.
NatWest said the total loss was 90 million pounds ($144 million) but that five million had already been provisioned and eight million had been clawed back by not paying the bonuses, making a loss of 77 million pounds in the accounts.
It also said Martin Owen, chief executive of the NatWest Markets investment banking division, would forego 200,000 pounds of his 500,000 pounds 1996 bonus.
"It is extremely regrettable that the losses and the mis-pricing have gone undetected for so long. Although confined to one area this is a significant setback for NatWest Markets," Derek Wanless, NatWest's chief executive, said.
The bank said the losses had started in late 1994 and were confined to its interest rate options area. It said it had suspended four more members of staff, appointed an acting head of global debt derivatives and would not pay bonuses totalling 8.0 million pounds to certain members of staff.
The bank said the initial findings of an inquiry into the losses, which were first revealed nearly two weeks ago, had found no flaws in the models used to calculate valuations of the derivatives in question.
Neil Dodgson, global head of options, has already been suspended and options trader Kyriacos Papouis left the firm in December.
It said the further suspensions were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets.
Peter Hall, President and Chief Operating Officer of NatWest Markets, will temporarily take on the additional responsibilities of Chief Administrative Officer.
Vincent Tomasi currently Senior Vice President and Head of US Debt Capital Markets at NatWest Markets in New York will take over as acting Head of Global Debt Derivatives.
Owen said he was disappointed by the "serious deficiency revealed in the interest rate options area."
NatWest said the second stage of the review being undertaken by lawyers Linklaters &amp; Paines and accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand will involve the further investigation of the areas where the losses happened.
It said it would also mount an investigation of the management issues associated with the deficiencies in these areas.
The bank said that a new management structure it had intended to put into place following its 1996 acquisition of U.S. bond trading house Greenwich Capital and the creation of a Global Debt Markets division would now be accelerated.
Britain's markets watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority will investigate the actions of individuals in the affair while bank regulator the Bank of England is likely to have something to say on the wider implications of the losses.
($1= 0.626 British Pounds)
NatWest Bank admitted on Thursday that its multi-million pound derivatives losses totalled nearly twice the amount initially thought and revealed the problem had begun as long ago as December 1994.
As a result of initial findings of a wide-ranging internal probe into the loss, the bank also took drastic action to restore confidence by suspending four senior members of staff and cutting millions of pounds from bonuses.
NatWest said the total loss was 90 million pounds ($144 million) but that five million had already been provisioned and eight million had been clawed back by not paying the bonuses, making a loss of 77 million pounds in the accounts.
It also said Martin Owen, chief executive of the NatWest Markets investment banking division, would forego 200,000 pounds of his 500,000 pounds 1996 bonus.
"It is extremely regrettable that the losses and the mis-pricing have gone undetected for so long. Although confined to one area this is a significant setback for NatWest Markets," Derek Wanless, NatWest's chief executive, said.
The bank said the losses had started in late 1994 and were confined to its interest rate options area. It said it had suspended four more members of staff, appointed an acting head of global debt derivatives and would not pay bonuses totalling 8.0 million pounds to certain members of staff.
The bank said the initial findings of an inquiry into the losses, which were first revealed nearly two weeks ago, had found no flaws in the models used to calculate valuations of the derivatives in question.
Neil Dodgson, global head of options, has already been suspended and options trader Kyriacos Papouis left the firm in December.
It said the further suspensions were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets.
Peter Hall, President and Chief Operating Officer of NatWest Markets, will temporarily take on the additional responsibilities of Chief Administrative Officer.
Vincent Tomasi currently Senior Vice President and Head of US Debt Capital Markets at NatWest Markets in New York will take over as acting Head of Global Debt Derivatives.
Owen said he was disappointed by the "serious deficiency revealed in the interest rate options area."
NatWest said the second stage of the review being undertaken by lawyers Linklaters &amp; Paines and accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand will involve the further investigation of the areas where the losses happened.
It said it would also mount an investigation of the management issues associated with the deficiencies in these areas.
The bank said that a new management structure it had intended to put into place following its 1996 acquisition of U.S. bond trading house Greenwich Capital and the creation of a Global Debt Markets division would now be accelerated.
Britain's markets watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority will investigate the actions of individuals in the affair while bank regulator the Bank of England is likely to have something to say on the wider implications of the losses.
($1= 0.626 British Pounds)
Martin Owen, chief executive of NatWest Markets, said on Thursday it was unacceptable that the investment bank had lost 77 million stg through the systematic mispricing of interest rate options since 1994.
"It has gone on (during) a long period; that is clearly unacceptable against the background of incidents in other firms as well. Fortunately, it does seem to be isolated to this area," Owen told Reuters in response to a question on why the problem had not been unearthed in the wake of the collapse of Barings in February 1995.  
Owen said details of how the mispricings went unnoticed for so long would be examined in the second phase of an internal inquiry.
The first stage found that a loss initially put at 50 million stg two weeks ago was in fact 90 million stg, although this was before a 5.0 million stg provision and 8.0 million NatWest said it would claw back in bonuses which would not be paid.
Owen said he was adamant NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc, would learn lessons from it.  
He said the next phase would examine information flows, internal controls and the responses of individuals to internal and external audit reports.
"All of these things will be examined now in some detail. I clearly do not want to have a debate in the public arena about it. These are going to be internal issues," Owen added.
A total of five members of staff have now been suspended as a result of the options loss and one trader has already left the firm.
Owen said he could not say if the initial options loss was the result of an individual's actions and could not comment on whether the subsequent mispricings had been intentional.  
"I don't want to prejudge the second phase of the report because we are really deep into the examination of all the individuals associated with it. The degree to which there was collusion or not is something which is being examined," he said.
But further disciplinary action could follow from the report's second stage, he said.
Owen said the suspensions so far were "a normal process, not intended to imply guilt", adding that they would put people in a position where they were free to cooperate with the inquiry team.
"You can imagine in a business such as NatWest Markets that people hold significant delegations of authority. Therefore we must be absolutely sure of their role before we can restore them," he added.  
Owen said NatWest was continuing to keep the Bank of England closely informed and had received the initial report, adding that the firm was "driving the situation as a management issue".
He said the second phase of the inquiry would take place as quickly as possible. Accounting records and pricing methodology had already been examined in some depth but the motivation of individuals still had to be examined.
Options trader Kyriacos Papouis, who left NatWest Markets last December, had not yet been interviewed by the firm. Papouis left for U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns, but last week resigned from his position there too.
"We have made requests to interview him and have received no response," Owen said, adding that Neil Dodgson, global head of options, had been interviewed as part of the inquiry.  
Owen said the losses, which were first announced only days after NatWest 1996 results but had apparently not been noticed for more than two years, had surfaced as part of ongoing process of examining trading positions and book valuations.
"It was revealed as part of the process of looking at that. There were certain procedural changes that occurred which then this particular issue to our attention. Unfortunately it came to our attention after the group's results were announced," he added.
Asked if NatWest Markets would take action against its auditors, Owen said the role of individuals, both internally and externally, would be examined in the next stage of the probe.
Owen acknowledged the loss was a set-back and that confidence in a proper system of controls was a core competency for a complex investment bank. he said he was committed to learning valuable lessons across the organisation, adding there was no evidence that any NatWest client had suffered losses as a result.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7719
A turbulent week for NatWest Markets ended on Friday with a shake-up of its global debt markets arm and the departure of three senior staff.
But the investment banking arm of British banking giant National Westminster Bank Plc (NatWest) stressed that there was no link with 90 million pounds ($144 million) in losses also reported this week.
These were built up over two years in interest rate options after systematic mispricings of the derivatives.
Britain's Serious Fraud Office said it was monitoring the options situation but was not investigating the losses, which the Bank of England and the financial markets watchdog, the Securities and Futures Authority, are scrutinising.
The management shake-up in NatWest's debt markets division marks a shift in power to managers from Greenwich Capital, the U.S. bond house it bought last year.
"The co-chief executives of the new global debt markets division are Gary Holloway and Chip Kruger," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters. Both joined NatWest when it bought Greenwich Capital.
Two casualties of the reshuffle were senior NatWest managers, Johan Hattingh and Alby Cator. The firm has also had to cope with the departure of its European equity derivatives head Roger Nagioff to Lehman Brothers and reports that staff morale is low.
Hattingh was European fixed income head and Cator managing director of European primary markets. Hattingh had been at NatWest Markets since 1993 when he joined from Japan's IBJ.
"Their departures are as a result of the restructuring of the debt markets division," the spokeswoman said when asked if the two had been made redundant by NatWest.
NatWest said Holloway would be based in Greenwich in the United States and would be responsible for the U.S. and Asian operations. Kruger would be London-based and responsible for European debt market operations.
Greg Bowes, who built up Greenwich's London business before the NatWest takeover, becomes head of government bonds, repos and futures and options.
Other key appointments are Frank Canelas, who will head corporate bonds origination, sales, trading and research, Bruce Snider who becomes head of asset-backed origination, structuring and trading and Phil Lotz, chief administrative officer for operations, IT and finance.
The NatWest spokeswoman said the shake-up played to both NatWest's and Greenwich's strengths. The changes, which were announced internally on Thursday, have created 10 main areas of responsibility within the debt markets division.
A number of NatWest managers kept key roles within the new framework. These included Graham Rendell in acquisition finance, housing finance and syndicated loans, and Simon Collins, who continues as head of debt structuring and structured finance.
Gary Mulgrew and Gordon McKechnie jointly head project finance, structured trade finance, and leasing and asset finance. George Trott and Martin Jaskel head debt origination for corporates and all financial institutions. Neil Coulbeck remains responsible for business management and portfolio administration.
NatWest's embarrassing losses in its global debt derivatives division have led to the suspension of five senior employees, bonus cuts totalling eight million pounds for a handful of staff and chief executive Martin Owen cutting his own bonus.
One banking source described the $590 million Greenwich purchase as being "effectively a reverse takeover" aimed at imposing Greenwich's bond expertise and experience over parts of NatWest's existing team, which had been struggling to build up its business in some areas.
The source also said the discovery of the options losses, which were first revealed two weeks ago, had been a result of auditing changes made by Greenwich managers.
On Thursday NatWest's Owen told Reuters that the interest rate options losses, which began in late 1994, had surfaced as a result of "certain procedural changes".
At the time of the Greenwich purchase, NatWest's Owen said it plugged a major gap in the group's investment banking strategy and would meet demand from clients for firms able to offer the broadest possible range of global fixed income products.
NatWest Markets detailed on Friday a shake-up of its global debt markets wing, shifting power to managers from Greenwich Capital, the U.S. bond house it bought last year.
The changes, which are not linked to revelations of 90 million pound ($144 million) losses by the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc in its options business, have established Greenwich managers in key positions.
"The co-chief executives of the new global debt markets division are Gary Holloway and Chip Kruger," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters, adding that two senior NatWest managers, Johan Hattingh and Alby Cator, had left as part of the changes.
Holloway and Kruger are from Greenwich Capital. Holloway will be based in Greenwich in the United States and will be responsible for the U.S. and Asian operations. Kruger will be London-based and responsible for European debt market operations.
Greg Bowes, who built up Greenwich's London business before the NatWest takeover, becomes head of government bonds, repos and futures and options.
Other key appointments are Frank Canelas, who will head corporate bonds origination, sales, trading and research, Bruce Snider who becomes head of asset-backed origination, structuring and trading and Phil Lotz, chief administrative officer for operations, IT and finance.
The NatWest spokeswoman said the shake-up played to both NatWest's and Greenwich's strengths. The changes, which were announced internally on Thursday, have created 10 main areas of responsibility within the debt markets division.
A number of NatWest managers kept key roles within the new framework. These included Graham Rendell in acquisition finance, housing finance and syndicated loans, and Simon Collins, who continues as head of debt structuring and structured finance.
Gary Mulgrew and Gordon McKechnie jointly head project finance, structured trade finance, and leasing and asset finance. George Trott and Martin Jaskel head debt origination for corporates and all financial institutions. Neil Coulbeck remains responsible for business management and portfolio administration.
NatWest said Hattingh, who was European fixed income head, and Cator, who was managing director of European primary markets, had left as part of the reshuffle.
"Their departures are as a result of the restructuring of the debt markets division," the spokeswoman said when asked if the two had been made redundant by NatWest.
Hattingh had been at NatWest Markets since 1993 when he joined from Japan's IBJ. With the integration of Greenwich, Hattingh was joined in European fixed income by Greg Bowes.
NatWest's embarrassing losses in its global debt derivatives division have led to the suspension of five senior employees and bonus cuts totalling eight million pounds for a handful of staff.
Chief executive Martin Owen cutting his own bonus and the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) and Bank of England are looking into what went wrong at the firm.
One banking source described the effect of the $590 million Greenwich purchase as being "effectively a reverse takeover" for debt markets aimed at imposing Greenwich's bond expertise and experience over parts of NatWest's existing team, which had been struggling to build up its business in some areas.
The source also said the discovery of the options losses, which were first announced two weeks ago, had been a direct result of auditing changes implemented by Greenwich managers.
On Thursday NatWest's Owen told Reuters that the interest rate options losses, which began in late 1994, had surfaced as a result of "certain procedural changes".
At the time of the Greenwich buy, NatWest's Owen said it plugged a major gap in the group's investment banking strategy and would meet demand from clients for firms able to offer the broadest possible range of global fixed income products.
Owen said Greenwich would give NatWest access to the world's biggest market -- U.S. Treasuries -- and the growing asset backed area. NatWest already had U.S. mergers and acquisitions advisory capacity in the form of Gleacher NatWest.
NatWest Markets said on Monday that its senior management did not know about the interest rate options pricing problem until three days before the losses were made public.
"Senior management did not know until February 25 that there was potentially something of significance," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters.
She denied a weekend newspaper report suggesting that NatWest, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc knew of the losses some time before they were revealed.
The mispricings, which on Thursday NatWest revealed had totalled 90 million pounds ($144 million), had come to light during the course of normal pricing reviews and it had not been able to put a price on the loss until February 28, when NatWest estimated it at 50 million pounds.
The initial discovery of the loss came to light through a more intensive review across the investment bank's trading areas, but it was a month or so before the extent of the mispricings became clear.
The options losses have been a painful and embarrassing episode for NatWest Markets and its chief executive Martin Owen, who on Thursday said he would forgo 200,000 of a 500,000 pound bonus as a result of the affair.
NatWest confirmed a report that the girlfriend of Kyriacos Papouis, the former NatWest options trader whom NatWest wants to interview about the losses, also worked for the bank but was employed in derivatives marketing and had nothing to do with Papouis's work.
She had been given a holiday period because of the situation, the spokeswoman added.
Papouis, who left NatWest for U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns, has not commented on the losses. Since the affair came to light he has also resigned from Bear Stearns.
He and five others have been reported to British financial watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) and the Bank of England is also looking into what went wrong at the bank.
NatWest Markets' global head of options, Neil Dodgson, who was suspended from the firm more than two weeks ago when the losses first came to light, is among those who will come under SFA scrutiny.
The others suspended last week were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives, and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets.
While the group has maintained that it does not believe any of its clients suffered losses as a result of the options mispricing, which went back as far as 1994, the spokeswoman declined to comment on whether NatWest would try to recoup any gains made by counterparties to any wrongly priced deals.
"We haven't determined that that is an issue," she said.
She dismissed suggestions that morale was low at the bank following last week's revelation that the loss was nearly twice as large as initially thought, the suspension of four senior staff and the cutting of bonuses to a handful of individuals.
"We are doing really good business here, and we continue to do good business. Everybody wants this to be dealt with properly and put behind us," she said.
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO), which investigates and prosecutes major and complex financial crime, has been contacted by NatWest but has not begun an investigation.
($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
British property group Hammerson Plc's chief executive Ron Spinney said on Monday he expected the British market to perform well over the next two years.
"I think the market will perform well over the next two years," Spinney told Reuters.
Earlier the group announced a 21.3 percent rise in pre-tax profit for 1996 to 70.0 million stg from 1995's 57.7 million stg. Net asset value (NAV) per share rose 3.2 percent to 388 pence from 376 pence.  
Spinney said Hammerson had had "another good year", including turning over 15 percent of the portfolio, investing 50 million stg on improving existing properties and embarking on an 800 million stg development programme.
He said the group would be spending around 115 million stg on its existing portfolio and its developments.
"We have taken steps to ensure growth in the future...The UK market for shopping centres and offices is bouyant," he added.  
Spinney said there were signs the French market was in a similar position to where the British market had been about two years before, adding he was confident there had been rises in values since the end of the year in Britain.
Hammerson's gearing is currently "relatively modest" at 58 percent, Spinney said, adding that the group itended acquiring more properties over the year, this would be split between areas and sectors.
"We are generally happy with it (the split) as it is at the present time," he said.
Volatile markets, a scramble for profits and the emergence of new financial tools have all contributed to recent investment banking failures, the head of Britain's financial markets watchdog said on Tuesday.
"We've got a very volatile market, people (are) spending a lot of time on profitability and market share but we are saying you have got to spend as much time also concentrating on control and compliance," Nick Durlacher, chairman of the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) told Reuters.
Earlier the SFA said it would not publish controversial changes to its rules -- making top executives more responsible for a major failure -- until it was clear they were in line with standards being proposed by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), the top financial regulator under Britain's complicated system.
Durlacher said the growth of derivatives over the last 10 years had posed new management problems as those now "sitting on top of the pile" had no first-hand experience of these instruments.
"These are without doubt posing control problems," Durlacher said, adding that senior managers were also making "old fashioned mistakes".
A "booming industry" and a very volatile job market compounded these problems. "We're just saying 'don't forget about the controls'," he added.
Bonuses and the problems inherent in the so-called "star system" were also factors which firms needed to think about, Durlacher said.
Durlacher said the SFA's outline proposals, first announced last September, to make senior executive officers take greater responsibility in the event of a "catastrophic failure" in their firm had prompted other regulators to address the issues.
He admitted that Tuesday's announcement that the SFA would wait for the SIB to catch up before pursuing its proposals had slowed the watchdog down but said it had done as much as it could.
"Under normal circumstances we would either have published a rule change, or we might have done this given the weight of comment, had one further and last consultation with a clear indication of when we would publish a rule change.
Durlacher said there had been "an awful lot of comment" on the proposals and it was now happy about how it would like the changes to be made, although there could be a final brief consultation on it.
He said he hoped the proposals would be finalised by the end of April, adding that he was reminded daily of the urgency for changes by newspaper reports indicating "how important it is that management pay attention to control and compliance in their businesses".
Durlacher said the SFA's disciplining of senior executives at Barings, the British merchant bank which collapsed under huge derivatives losses in February 1995, had been "a long and difficult process" and in one case had set a precendent.
It was the SFA's decision not to pursue Barings' chairman Peter Baring and deputy chairman Andrew Tuckey which prompted it to revise its rules on management responsibility.
Durlacher said that regardless of the role of Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson whose unauthorised trades crippled the bank, the demise of Barings was ultimately due to the fact that its executives "had forgotten how to bank".
He said the question of reversing the burden of proof, so that senior executive officers would have to show that they had done everything they could to avoid a disaster, was the hardest thing for the SFA to resolve and had received most criticism.
But he was confident it would ultimately go through. "We believe there remains a requirement that we do concentrate people's minds on the responsibilities they hold in these very important positions," he said.
The head of Britain's financial markets watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) said on Tuesday that former Barings treasury chief Ian Hopkins had broken precendent in refusing to be bound by SFA rules.
Last week the SFA banned Hopkins from being a director in the City for at least three years for his part in the 1995 collapse of the blue-blooded British merchant bank. Nick Leeson, the Singapore-based trader whose unauthorised trading led to losses of nearly $1.4 billion, is currently serving a jail sentence for his role in the affair.
Hopkins was also ordered to pay 10,000 pounds ($15,800) towards the SFA's costs after an independent tribunal found that he was no longer "a fit and proper person" to be a director of an SFA regulated firm.
"Its been difficult for us because it has been without precedent. We've never had to confront this before when someone signed a contract with us to be bound by our rules and then in effect ignored them," Nick Durlacher, the SFA's chairman, told Reuters.
Hopkins, one of nine Barings executives to have been disciplined by the SFA, has always protested that the attempted to "blow the whistle" on irregularities in the Singapore operation but that other managers ignored his warnings.
"I think the tribunal judged that if Mr Hopkins was a whistle blower he didn't have much of a pea in his whistle," Durlacher said, adding that Hopkins "had lived with an unreconciled balance of 100 million pounds for three months".
Durlacher said he was "not vitriolic" about Hopkins although he said it had not been easy. But if anyone adopted the same approach in the future, the SFA "would adopt the same process of being as scrupulously fair as we can".
He strongly denied that Hopkins had been dealt with more harshly than others because of his refusal to recognise the SFA's authority over him. Hopkins told British newspapers after the ruling that it had been vindictive.
Durlacher also denied that he had offered Hopkins a deal as it would not have been up to him to do so anyway. He said he had only had one telephone conversation with him and had been very careful about what he said.
"What I did say to Mr Hopkins was that I encouraged him to argue his case in front of us rather than to ignore us," he said, adding this could either have involved arguing his case at a tribunal or to considering settling with the SFA, as seven of the other Barings executives disciplined by the SFA had done.
Only one Barings case is now outstanding. Ron Baker, who was head of financial products at the firm, is appealing against an SFA tribunal's decision to reprimand him over his monitoring of one part of Barings' proprietory trading activities. ($ = 0.630 British Pounds)
A small but fast-growing bank which lends only to socially and environmentally-friendly projects said on Wednesday it had more than doubled in size in its first full year in Britain.
Independently-owned Triodos Bank, which was founded in the Netherlands in 1980 and now has offices in Britain and Belgium, lends only to what it describes as projects "with social and environmental objectives".
It said its level of savings in Britain had grown by 111 percent in 1996 to 20.2 million pounds ($32.1 million) from 11.3 million pounds in 1995 and its loan portfolio by 117 percent to 10.2 million pounds from 5.6 million pounds.
"We are delighted with our first year's results in the UK. We are continuing to see substantial interest from both savers and borrowers looking for a positive ethical approach to banking," said Glen Saunders, the bank's managing director in Britain.
While Britain's big six high street banks have reported combined profits of 12.6 billion pounds in 1996, up from 10.8 billion pounds in 1995, Triodos earlier said its net profit for the year was a mere 342,000 pounds, up from 262,000 the previous year.
But Triodos now has 2,598 savings accounts in Britain compared to 1,358 at the end of 1995. It has attracted British media interest after launching new types of savings accounts and funds promoting fair trade during 1996.
The bank, whose British operation was started in Bristol in the west of England in July 1995, said the growth had been secured on a threefold increase in its capital base, following a share issue in the Netherlands.
A significant proportion of the new shareholding came from Dutch and Belgian financial institutions, including Rabobank Nederland and Commercial Union subsidiary Delta Lloyd.
Saunders said this influx of non-voting shareholders had shown "increasing mainstream recognition" of the bank's "experience in lending to the social economy".
The bank has so far lent to projects including a wind farm in Cumbria, north-west England, and organic milk suppliers co-operative, an environmentally-friendly housing development in a Welsh national park and a housing association which provides homes for people with special needs.
Triodos has also become involved in so-called "microcredit" programmes in developing countries, where it lends to impoverished people to develop projects which then generate income, helping them to work their way out of poverty.
"Microcredit is sensitive to the local economy, does not create dependency and is self-sustaining as the money repaid is 'recycled' to other borrowers," Triodos said in a background statement.
The bank, which had only 62 staff at the end of 1996, has also branched out into specialised fund management, including funds managed on behalf of charities and governments.
Its Green Investment Fund, established last year, has raised 8.0 million pounds for investment in recognised "green" enterprises while the Wind Fund has raised around 4.0 million for investment in wind farms and other renewable energy projects.
The bank's combined balance sheet, which includes its Dutch and Belgian operations, grew by 54 percent in 1996 to reach 161.9 million pounds at the end of the year.
($ = 0.628 British Pounds)
Michael Marks, chairman of British stockbroking firm Smith New Court before it was taken over by Merrill Lynch, was on Thursday elevated to a new European role in a restructuring of the U.S. investment bank.
Marks, who according to recent newspaper reports was paid a bonus of four million pounds ($6.4 million), has been made chief operating officer for Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
He was most recently co-head of global equities and will remain as deputy chairman of Merrill Lynch International. His appointment comes into force on June 16.
Marks told Reuters the "realignment" emphasised the importance of London as a financial centre.
"We run the Europe, Middle East and Africa region from London and the City (of London) is becoming of increasing importance. This move further underlines the importance of London in the region," he said.
Marks said the business has previously been run along global product lines and Merrill was now attempting to run it by global products and regionally.
Merrill Lynch International will still have a co-ordinating role to make sure clients are being well served, he added.
Under the new structure there will now be five chief operating officers for Merrill's international regions. The others are Asia-Pacific, Latin America and Canada, Japan and finally Australia and New Zealand.
Kevin Watts, who was head of investment banking for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, has been made chief operating officer for the Asia-Pacific region.
The changes mean Merrill will now be made up of a U.S. private client group, an international private client group, an asset management group and a corporate and institutional client group.
It was previously divided into two main areas, private client and corporate and institutional client.
Merrill said the "organisational realignment" was designed to "enhance services provided to a diverse global client base and position the company for the substantial worldwide growth opportunities in financial services".
Marks, 55, who began his career in the City of London with Smith Brothers in 1960, became chief executive of Smith New Court in 1987 and chairman early in 1995.
He joined Merrill when it took over Smith New Court in September 1995 and has widely been viewed as central to attempts to integrate the two firms and their differing cultures.
This culture clash has led to staff leaving the firm. Last year Marks said 100 employees had left Merrill's investment banking division over the year. But others have suggested the number of defections was much larger.
Merrill is on the look-out for a new London headquarters to bring together the former Smith New Court operations which are situated northwest of the City and its own which are closer to the capital's traditional financial heartland.
The firm has not confirmed its final choice for a new home but recent reports said it had settled on an imposing former post office building close to St Paul's Cathedral.
Other options which it has considered are a move to Docklands, the former docks to the east of the City, or an expansion of Merrill's existing Ropemaker Place building to an adjacent site. Insiders say senior executives at the firm favour staying in the City.
Marks has been a member of the board of the London Stock Exchange since 1994.
