Financial services and property group Liberty International vowed on Thursday to change the way the British pensions market works with the launch of a new user-friendly subsidiary.
"The market is poised for change, requiring a fresh approach, and our company will provide this by demystifying pensions for everybody - both individuals and the companies for which they work," Liberty chairman Donald Gordon said.
Liberty has set up its own pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, and will target retail pensions and money purchase pension schemes -- pensions where the benefit is linked to the amount an individual has put in.
Liberty, 69 percent owned by South Africa's Liberty Life, has enrolled the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme, which will pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions.
Liberty's Gordon said the move into the British pensions market was an extension of a worldwide shift from defined benefit -- where an individual's pension is related to his final salary -- to defined contribution principles.
This would have "a most profound influence on business practice and retirement savings in the future". In Britain there is also "an urgent and growing need for quality privatised retirement savings which require a radical change in approach and funding techniques", Gordon added.
A rapidly ageing population and low birth rate were combining to increase this need, Gordon said.
Liberty also announced it had teamed up with fund management group Hermes to form Hermes Liberty International Pensions. This will offer specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Gordon said.
He said Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help the group to provide quality and competitively priced pension services. Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
As well as selling pensions directly by telephone, Liberty also plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said. ($1=.6395 Pound)
Financial services and property group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its own pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in a joint statement they were also setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty International Pensions to offer specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help it to provide quality and competitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International Pensions still required approval of Britain's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer assets to the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the new venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the biggest in the country, is willing to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.
Fischel said an announcement would be made on exactly how the retail customer business would work at a future date, adding he could not give details at present. ($1=.6395 Pound)
A high-profile purge at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell of any managers found to bear responsibility for failing to spot irregular dealings by former fund manager Peter Young is expected next week, banking sources said on Friday.
The investment banking arm of Deutsche Bank is due to complete a preliminary report with accountants Ernst &amp; Young into what went wrong internally and led to the suspension of three Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) funds last month and Young's dismissal for alleged "gross misconduct".
Trading in the three funds, which totalled around 1.4 billion pounds ($2.21 billion) and were held by around 90,000 retail investors, was temporarily suspended early in September but resumed after Deutsche stepped in with a 180 million pounds cash injection.
Young, who has had his assets frozen and his passport impounded, is currently under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office, which probes major financial crime.
He has said he was not guilty of any criminal activity and is being made a scapegoat for failings.
A probe into his management of two of the funds in question, which held too high a proportion of unlisted, speculative stocks has been underway since problems emerged.
Both MGAM and investments watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) have undertaken their own inquiries with forensic accountants carrying out a detailed dissection of trading history of the funds.
IMRO's own investigation, which could lead to hefty punishments against the firm, will take longer to conclude.
There have been conflicting reports over what the ramifications of any sackings following the debacle would be.
As head of the asset management arm Keith Percy's position will inevitably be under review but some British newspapers have suggested key MGAM clients are opposing any action against him while others are said to be threatening to withdraw assets if he stays.
A similar quandary is reported to be exercising the minds of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG) officials in London and the Deutsche Bank hierarchy in Frankfurt.
Other key managers, including Glyn Owen, MGAM's chief European investment officer and Mike Wheatley, compliance director for the fund management business are also likely to face scrutiny because of their executive responsibilities.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said it could not comment on speculative newspaper reports, but the group said when problems first surfaced that it would produce a preliminary report within six weeks.
"We can't comment on any such speculation and we have always pointed out that we would announce potential management decisions after the internal investigation has been finalised," a DMG spokesman in London told Reuters.
From the beginning Deutsche has made it clear that it would take any action deemed necessary to restore confidence in its fund management business and if lapses in internal controls were found, heads would roll.
But despite difficult decisions emerging in the intervening weeks, Deutsche's resolve to give its fund management arm and by association its investment banking operation a clean bill of health, has not faltered, banking sources said.
($1=.6350 Pound)
Shares in Cable &amp; Wireless (C&amp;W) advanced on Tuesday after investors welcomed news of a deal with NYNEX of the United States and Bell Canada International to create Britain's largest cable operator.
"This was a bold strategic stroke by the (C&amp;W) chief executive," said Chris McFadden, analyst at Merrill Lynch.
The deal, which took only five weeks to complete, brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms, eclipsing Telewest as Britain's biggest cable operator.
It sent C&amp;W shares soaring, peaking at 476.5 pence before easing back to close up 25.5 at 466.5 pence.
The move is a landmark deal for C&amp;W chief executive Richard Brown, appointed five months ago, and follows the collapse of merger talks earlier this year between C&amp;W and its great rival British Telecommunications Plc.
"The logic is irrefutable...the advantages of scope and size are undoubtedly there," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst John Tysoe.
BT said it welcomed the consolidation in the sector and analysts said the move could strengthen the telecoms giant's calls for it to be allowed to provide cable television.
But BT's shares edged lower to close down 4.5 at 353.5 pence and analysts said the new company would give BT a run for its money.
"We had a common vision of what could be done and we have done it with speed and nimbleness," Brown told Reuters. C&amp;W last month replaced BT in a major German alliance with diversified utility RWE that is seen as the main competitor to Deutsche Telekom's dominance as the German market is liberalised.
The new merged company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, will give C&amp;W's telephone company Mercury access to 18 million business and domestic customers, Brown said.
The number of homes within its sights will eclipse former market leader Telewest's two million at 2.47 million but it will not be in direct competition as the companies operate in different franchises.
Telewest's shares were boosted by the news, as analysts re-evaluated the potential in the sector, gaining 12.5 pence to close at 135.5 pence.
"This is clear evidence of confidence in the future of the U.K. cable industry," a spokesman for industry body the Cable Communications Association, said.
Around six billion pounds ($7.5 billion) has already been invested in laying out cable networks and a further six billion pounds of investment is planned, the spokesman added.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex transaction involving a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless. This values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Once the merger and Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company -- to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications -- with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent.
The remaining 15 percent will be floated, which analysts said would give it some scarcity value, with listings planned in both London and New York, probably in about six months.
C&amp;W's Brown said he could not detail the financial aspects of the merger because of the new company's planned listing.
McFadden said cost savings should be quite significant, including tax offsets, refinancing of high-yield cable television funding and possibly through staff cuts, along with eliminating duplication in laying cables.
The new group aims to increase revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers, offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access.
It could also secure more favourable terms for programming from BSkyB, the satellite broadcaster in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake.
BSkyB shares ended down 18 pence at 678.5 pence. ($1=.7986 Pound)
Cable and telecoms giants Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp of the U.S. and Bell Canada International on Tuesday announced the formation of a major new British cable player by merging the operations of their British subsidiaries.
This brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex deal which involves a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless and values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Videotron, which was already 26 percent owned by Bell Cablemedia, was the target of a long-running takeover battle, with Cable &amp; Wireless emerging as favourite.
Recent reports said German telecoms group Deutsche Telekom and International CableTel of the U.S. were also interested in taking it over.
Once the merger and the Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company - to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications - with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent of the shares. The remaining 15 percent will floated, C&amp;W told Reuters.
The groups intend to list the company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, in both London and New York. This is likely to take place in about six months, C&amp;W added.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications "...will provide local, national, international, data and mobile telecommunications, together with multichannel television and Internet services" to around six million franchised homes and to businesses throughout Britain, the groups said in a statement.
Richard Brown, chief executive of Cable &amp; Wireless, said the new company would be the only company in Britain able to offer multiple services that until now people had to get from different providers.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications will be the only company in the UK capable of offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access," Brown said in a statement.
The companies outlined a number of benefits from the new company, saying it would increase its revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers and increased access to a broader customer base.
It would also produce "significant cost savings" by eliminating duplication, enhancing purchasing power increasing capital expenditure efficiencies, they added.
As well as the services it will be able to offer immediately, the new company will be strategically positioned to offer new products such as interactive digital services and multi-media products "as they become available", they said.
Britain's largest cable television company was born Tuesday in the merger of the British operations of cable and telecommunications giants Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp. of the United States and Bell Canada International.
The deal, which took only five weeks to complete, brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms, eclipsing Telewest as Britain's biggest cable operator.
It was a landmark deal for C&amp;W Chief Executive Richard Brown, appointed five months ago, and follows the collapse of merger talks earlier this year between C&amp;W and its great rival, British Telecommunications Plc.
C&amp;W last month replaced BT in a major German alliance with diversified utility RWE that is seen as the main competitor to the dominant Deutsche Telekom as the German market is being liberalised.
Brown said the merged company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, would give C&amp;W's Mercury telephone company access to a total of 18 million business and domestic customers.
Latest statistics show 30 percent of homes that can take cable after an extensive cable-laying drive beneath Britain's streets have opted for one or more cable service.
The development was welcomed by the industry, battling to compete with satellite operators such as BSkyB in television services and British Telecom in telephones.
"This is clear evidence of confidence in the future of the U.K. cable industry," said a spokesman for the Cable Communications Association, an industry group.
"The broadband fibre optic network being laid across the U.K. is the most advanced in the world for delivery to individual homes," he said, adding that around 6 billion pounds ($7.5 billion) had already been invested in building the network and another six billion of investment was planned.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex transaction involving a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless. This values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Once the merger and the Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company -- to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications -- with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent of the shares.
The remaining 15 percent will floated and the groups intend to list the company in both London and New York. This is likely to take place in about six months.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications will be the only company in the U.K. capable of offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access," Brown said.
Stephen Pettit, executive director of European operations at C&amp;W, told Reuters Financial Television that the deal would not lead to duplication.
"Both Mercury and the cable companies had strategies to dig up the streets and lay cables and they are looking at the same streets. This gives the chance to do it once and keep the costs down as a result," he said.
Britain's largest cable operator was born on Tuesday from the merger of the British operations of cable and telecoms giants Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp of the U.S. and Bell Canada International.
The deal, which took only five weeks to complete, brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms, eclipsing Telewest as Britain's biggest cable operator.
It is a landmark deal for C&amp;W chief executive Richard Brown, appointed five months ago, and follows the collapse of merger talks earlier this year between C&amp;W and its great rival British Telecommunications Plc.
C&amp;W last month replaced BT in a major German alliance with diversified utility RWE that is seen as the main competitor to the dominant Deutsche Telekom as the German market is being liberalised.
Brown said the merged company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, would give C&amp;W's telephone company Mercury access to a total of 18 million business and domestic customers.
Latest statistics show 30 percent of homes which can take cable after an extensive cable-laying drive beneath Britain's streets have opted for one or more cable service.
Brown said the move had been spawned by a common vision.
"We had a common vision of what could be done and we have done it with speed and nimbleness," he told Reuters.
The development was welcomed by the industry, battling to compete with satellite operators such as BSkyB in television services and British Telecom in telephones.
"This is clear evidence of confidence in the future of the UK cable industry," a spokesman for industry body the Cable Communications Association, said.
"The broadband fibre optic network being laid across the UK is the most advanced in the world for delivery to individual homes," he said, adding that around 6 billion pounds ($7.5 billion) had already been invested in building the network and a further six billion of investment was planned.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex transaction involving a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless. This values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Once the merger and the Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company -- to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications -- with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent of the shares.
The remaining 15 percent will floated and the groups intend to list the company in both London and New York. This is likely to take place in about six months.
C&amp;W's Brown said he could not detail the financial aspects of the merger because of the new company's planned listing.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications "...will provide local, national, international, data and mobile telecommunications, together with multichannel television and Internet services".
Brown said the new company would be the only one in Britain able to offer multiple services which people had to get from different providers until now.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications will be the only company in the UK capable of offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access."
The group aims to increase revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers and increased access to a broader customer base. It will also produce "significant cost savings" by eliminating duplication, enhancing purchasing power and increasing capital expenditure efficiencies.
The new company will be strategically positioned to offer new products like interactive digital services and multi-media products "as they become available", the companies said.
Stephen Pettit, executive director of European operations at C&amp;W, told Reuters Financial Television that the deal would not lead to duplication.
"Both Mercury and the cable companies had strategies to dig up the streets and lay cables and they are looking at the same streets. This gives the chance to do it once and keep the costs down as a result," he said.
Pettit said no other players could match what he described as "a unique force" in the British market.
Cable and telecoms giants Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada International on Tuesday announced the formation of a major new British cable player by merging the operations of their British subsidiaries.
This brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex deal which involves a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless and values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Videotron, which was already 26 percent owned by Bell Cablemedia, was the target of a long-running takeover battle, with Cable &amp; Wireless emerging as favourite.
Recent reports said German telecoms group Deutsche Telekom and International CableTel of the U.S. were also interested in taking it over.
Once the merger and the Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company - to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications - with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent of the shares. The remaining 15 percent will floated, C&amp;W told Reuters.
The groups intend to list the company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, in both London and New York. This is likely to take place in about six months, C&amp;W added.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications "...will provide local, national, international, data and mobile telecommunications, together with multichannel television and Internet services" to around six million franchised homes and to businesses throughout Britain, the groups said in a statement.
Richard Brown, chief executive of Cable &amp; Wireless, said the new company would be the only company in Britain able to offer multiple services that until now people had to get from different providers.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications will be the only company in the UK capable of offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access," Brown said in a statement.
The companies outlined a number of benefits from the new company, saying it would increase its revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers and increased access to a broader customer base.
It would also produce "significant cost savings" by eliminating duplication, enhancing purchasing power increasing capital expenditure efficiencies, they added.
As well as the services it will be able to offer immediately, the new company will be strategically positioned to offer new products such as interactive digital services and multi-media products "as they become available", they said.
Britain's largest home loan lender, Halifax Building Society, said on Thursday it was confident of avoiding any takeover attempt when it floats on the stock market and sheds mutuality for bank status next June.
"We think we can stand on our own feet," David Gilchrist, Halifax's director of corporate affairs said.
The society, currently owned by its savers and borrowers, gave details of the timetable for conversion and flotation, which analysts have said could be worth 10 billion pounds ($16 billion).
The building society's nine million members will vote early next year on the conversion, which it is billing as the largest single extension of private share ownership in Britain.
Gilchrist said a decision to transfer its business to an existing subsidiary rather than to a company specially formed for conversion meant it would lose five-year protection against takeover but underlined its confidence.
Analysts said the consolidation of Britain's financial services market is likely to continue, which could make the large and successful Halifax a possible target.
The flotation will project the society into the top 25 companies in London's blue chip FTSE 100 stock index and Gilchrist said he was confident that shareholders would be convinced by its past performance to reject any bid attempt.
The concersion method raises the voting threshold needed for the plans to go ahead, but Gilchrist said he believed the necessary 50 percent of investing members entitled to vote would be met.
"We have no real concerns as far as the voting is concerned," he said, adding that previous building society conversions achieved approvals of over 75 percent.
"It will be a high-profile exercise, backed up by plenty of marketing," Gilchrist said.
But members eagerly expecting to find out how big a windfall they are likely to receive when they receive free shares will have to wait until January before getting any indication.
The Halifax said its members would be given full details of the conversion plans and share distribution scheme. This will tell them the number of shares they are entitled to and indicate their likely price range, based on prevailing market conditions.
Gilchrist said members would get a "broad idea" at this time, but would not be drawn on what the share hand-out was likely to be worth to the average investor.
He also declined to comment on the cost of the conversion exercise. But it seems likely to provide a boon to Britain's postal service and the printing industry as well as the financial and legal advisors working on the plans.
"The major element of cost is printing and mailing. We will be sending 75 million items of mail," he said.
Halifax members will be urged to vote "as quickly as possible" on the proposals and a special general meeting will be held in February. If members vote in favour, they will be sent details of share allocations in April or May.
Gilchrist said the Halifax had not yet done any market research on how many members would sell or retain shares.
"We are not trying to persuade people one way or another whether to hold shares or to sell the shares," he said, adding the Halifax would sound out members nearer the time.
The society will remind its members that they should have at least 100 pounds in total in their accounts on December 31 1996.
If eligible for a variable distribution of extra free shares they "may need to top up their share accounts to the November 25 1994 level by the date of the special general meeting" to qualify for the maximum number of free shares, the Halifax said. ($1=.6260 Pound)
Britain's Halifax Building Society is confident of avoiding any takeover attempts once it sheds its mutual status and becomes a publicly quoted bank in June next year, a senior official said on Thursday.
"We think we can stand on our own feet," David Gilchrist, Halifax's director of corporate affairs said in a telephone interview following the announcement of the timetable for the planned conversion and 10 billion stg flotation.
The building society's nine million members -- its savers and borrowers -- will vote on the conversion early next year.  
Gilchrist said the building society's decision to convert by transferring its business to an existing subsidiary rather than to a company specially formed for conversion meant it would lose a five-year protection against takeover.
It will also increase the voting threshold needed to give the plans the go-ahead. But he was confident that it would achieve a sufficiently high vote in favour, of at least 50 percent of all investing members entitled to vote.
"We have no real concerns as far as the voting is concerned," he said, adding that previous building society conversions achieved approvals of over 75 percent.  
"It will be a high-profile exercise, backed up by plenty of marketing," Gilchrist said.
Earlier, the Halifax said its members would be given full details of the conversion plans and share distribution scheme in January 1997. This will tell them the number of shares they are entitled to receive and an indication of their likely price range, based on prevailing market conditions at the time.
Gilchrist said members would get a "broad idea" at this time, but would not be drawn on what the share hand-out was likely to be worth to the average investor.  
He also declined to comment on what the cost of the conversion exercise would be, saying only that a significant element would be printing and postage costs.
"The major element of cost is printing and mailing. We will be sending 75 million items of mail," he said.
Halifax members will be urged to vote "as quickly as possible" on the proposals and a special general meeting will be held in Sheffield in February. If members vote in favour, they will be sent details of share allocations in April or May.
Gilchrist said the Halifax had not yet done any market research on how many members would sell or retain shares.  
"We are not trying to persuade people one way or another whether to hold shares or to sell the shares," he said, adding the Halifax would sound out members nearer the time.
But it was working on the basis that a "large number" would have already planned to spend their windfall and had set up a share dealing system to ensure an orderly market for what will be the largest single extension of private share ownership ever in Britain, Gilchrist added.
Those who decide to sell will be offered a free-of-charge postal service for a limited period while those who keep them can chose between placing them in a nominee company or receiving a share certificate. The Halifax favours the nominee option.
The society will remind its members that they should have at least 100 stg in total in their accounts on December 31 1996.
If eligible for a variable distribution of extra free shares they "may need to top up their share accounts to the November 25 1994 level by the date of the special general meeting" to qualify for the maximum number of free shares, the Halifax said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
The "Big Bang" maintained London as one of the world's financial hubs, but 10 years on the role of specialised financial "boutiques" at the heart of the City is under mounting pressure from huge integrated investment banks.
"The wonderful time that there has been for the small boutique since Big Bang is over. The days of the single violinist are past, it's time for the full orchestra," one banking source told Reuters.
The so-called Big Bang of 1986 brought about radical reforms in the way the London Stock Exchange and the British government bond market operated, principally by allowing mergers between merchant banks, brokers and stock jobbers.
It saw the demise of traditional names such as Wedd Durlacher Mordaunt and Phillips and Drew which became parts of Barclays' investment bank BZW and of UBS respectively.
And ever since the initial wave of changes investment banking giants with global aspirations have been hoovering up small players which have carved out a niche for themselves.
U.S. EXPERIENCE SETS THE PACE
In the world of corporate finance this pattern of smaller firms being swallowed up by the large players is set to mirror what has taken place in the U.S., corporate financiers say.
"I believe the world is moving away from small nimble-footed boutiques, which had a wonderful time under the Conservative government. The new world is going to be based around very big cross-border corporate finance. You need a very big broking arm behind you," one corporate financier said.
This need for broking capacity and a dwindling number of independent brokers, combined with increasing regulatory demands for capital, has shrunk the opportunities for boutiques. Even in the growing derivatives market, the amounts of capital needed to play the global markets mean small outfits are hard to sustain.
BOUTIQUES THREATENED BY EUROPE INTEGRATION
Apart from the possibility of an opposition Labour government and perhaps greater restrictions on mergers and acquisitions activity, with the need for companies to prove that a takeover is in the public interest, the other threat to corporate finance boutiques comes from European integration.
Increased bureaucracy and more rigorous European Commission demands on the companies involved in takeovers will mean even greater research capabilities and legal back-up are required by the financiers advising companies on such deals, bankers say.
"Boutiques won't be much good if you have got to take a huge team of analysts and brokers out to Brussels every time you are planning a deal," said one.
With U.S. investment banking mammoths such as Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch building increasing roles in corporate finance as well as their traditional broking and trading strengths, this is also putting pressure on the small corporate finance players.
HAMBRO MAGAN FALLS TO NATIONAL WESTMINSTER
A recent casualty is J Hambro Magan, which two weeks ago was sold to NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank, for an estimated 80 million pounds ($127.3 million).
The prominent corporate finance boutique was set up by George Magan in 1988 and has been involved in some of the biggest mergers and acquisitions in Britain in recent years.
"The new world is going to be dominated by the very big boys," another banker said.
Some commentators say the future of small boutiques is not as bleak as it may appear. They see the demise of some as merely part of a cycle which will spawn new dynamic teams based around talented individuals who may decide to leave a large established firm, take clients and expertise with them, and go it alone.
"It's an on-going process. It's always postulated every time there's a rash of takeovers that boutiques are going out of fashion. But it's the same process as Big Bang. Small firms have developed since. Some have disappeared and been replaced by others," a banking analyst at one U.S. investment bank said.
In cases such as Hambro Magan, the cycle has turned full circle, with the key individuals making significant financial gains for themselves by selling a highly successful business at its peak and coming back into the folds of a larger player.
SMALL FIRMS CAN SELL PERSONALISED SERVICE
But while small firms will never compete for the truly global roles, there is still a place for the personalised localised service offered by boutiques. "There's always a demand for that type of service," he added.
Others agree that in a world where investment banks are attempting to become so-called "one-stop shops", the pressures to sell clients an entire package of products could in fact enhance the position of boutiques, whose advice is perhaps more truly independent as they don't have other axes to grind.
DRESDNER KLEINWORT BUYS LUTHY BAILLIE
Another boutique to have fallen prey to a multi-national banking player with plenty of capital behind it, sophisticated trading and broking operations and global ambitions is the bond specialist Luthy Baillie Dowsett Pethick &amp; Co.
It was snapped up only two weeks ago by Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, the investment banking division of Germany's second largest commercial bank Dresdner Bank.
Peter Luthy, one of the founders of the 15-person bond boutique which was set up in 1990, said the firm's reliance on a market undergoing significant changes because of the interest rate environment and the constraints of size had forced it to seek embrace of a larger partner.
"We learned a hell of a lot. But our business skills are better used in a big firm. The opportunities are better in a big firm," Luthy told Reuters recently.
Such changes will not necessarily end with the small firms such as Luthy's. Banking analysts and corporate financiers alike have for some time been predicting the days are numbered for what one called the "super-boutiques".
This dwindling list of traditional British merchant banks includes Cazenoves, NM Rothschilds, Hambros, Schroders and Robert Fleming. Takeovers here are complicated in some cases by family holdings, but strategic alliances have been suggested as an acceptable alternative in order to compete globally.
"I think even the super-boutiques are going to be struggling over the next five years," the first banking source said. ($1=.6285 Pound)
Lloyd's insurance market on Tuesday welcomed a crucial U.S. district court ruling in its favour and said it would extend a deadline for acceptances of a 3.2 billion pound ($5.5 billion) recovery plan.
"We have decided in the circumstances we will keep the offer open," Lloyd's chairman David Rowland said after a district court in Baltimore, Maryland, overturned an injunction by U.S. Names -- as investors in the market are known -- who were unhappy with the plan.
Rowland did not say how long the deadline would be extended from noon (1100 GMT) on Wednesday, but insurance sources said it would probably be stretched for several days to allow more U.S. Names to approve the plan.
A Lloyd's spokesman said the ruling had removed the last major legal obstacle to the 300-year-old insurance market's recovery plan, aimed at ending years of turbulence triggered by huge liabilities.
Lloyd's earlier said more than 82 percent of its 34,000 worldwide members had approved the plan, but only 53 percent of the 2,700 U.S. names had given the go-ahead.
"Since we won the appeal, faxes have been flooding in from U.S. Names accepting the settlement offer," a Lloyd's spokesman said by telephone.
Lloyd's hopes the support shown by Names will be enough to declare the plan unconditional when its ruling council meets on Thursday. The plan still has to be approved by the Department of Trade and Industry.
Lloyd's problems began in the 1980s when a fatal combination of negligent underwriting, poor investment advice and a sequence of unexpected natural disasters conspired to bring about losses of several billion pounds.
Long standing Names were for the first time in their lives suddenly faced with the prospect of unlimited losses.
A spokesman for one of the three key litigating British action groups representing major loss-making Names described the successful appeal as "very good" for the recovery plan.
"I think we did better by the settlement than by going through the courts," said the spokesman for the Merrett 418 Names Association, which groups 1,932 members.
Under the proposals, Lloyd's will reinsure its massive liabilities in a new company called Equitas. It is asking investors to help fund Equitas but has offered them a compensation package to help offset their losses.
Rowland said he was delighted by the U.S. ruling, which overturned a injunction granted by a lower court to a group of U.S. Names who wanted more time to study the terms of the settlement.
"I am very pleased. I have believed for a long time that what we are doing is in the interest of the whole society," Rowland told Reuters, adding he did not want to exclude anyone from the offer.
Many of the market's pre-1993 liabilities stem from pollution and asbestosis related claims in the United States, some of them dating back even to the last century.
Britain's Invesco Plc Monday agreed to merge with Houston-based mutual fund company AIM Management Group Inc. in a deal valued at $1.6 billion, creating one of the world's largest investment management businesses.
The deal is the largest in U.S. fund history, industry experts said.
The combined group will be called Amvesco Plc and have around $150 billion under management. The merger will be paid for with about $1.1 billion in new stock and the rest in cash and debt, Invesco officials said.
"We are creating a prototype company for the future," Bob McCullough, Invesco's chief financial officer, said in an interview.
Invesco Chairman Charles Brady, who will lead the combined group, said it would have "the scale necessary for success as a financially strong and independent business operating in an increasingly concentrated industry."
McCullough stressed the deal was a merger of the two companies, which would focus on growing revenue but retain their individual identities.
"They're buying themselves into the U.S. money management market," said Bruce Brewington, an equity analyst at Putnam, Lovell &amp; Thorton, an investment banking firm in San Francisco.
Martin Cross, analyst at UBS, said Invesco is buying at the top of the Wall Street market, which many experts see as overpriced. He said UBS strategists are forecasting a 15 percent downward correction in the Dow Jones industrial average next year, and if it occurs, it would leave AIM looking rather expensive.
"The deal is exquisitely timed for the AIM shareholders and conversely not so exquisitely for Invesco shareholders," Cross said.
Invesco said it would fund the deal by issuing 290 million new shares to AIM shareholders. These would be valued at about $1.1 billion. AIM shareholders will own around 45 percent of the merged company.
McCullough said another $500 million needed to fund the merger would come in the form of cash and debt.
The merger presented a chance for the two companies to use different distribution channels and approaches. McCullough said he did not forsee any culture clash between the two.
There would be no change in their differing approaches, with Invesco continuing to be a "no-load" house, selling products direct to the customer, and AIM selling its nearly three dozen funds through brokers.
McCullough said the cost of the merger was not excessive.
"There's no question that it is a lot of money, but we view this as a long-term investment for both of us," he said. The long-term commitment was underlined by the fact that almost 50 percent of the combined shares would be held by management.
Both companies were "really active managers" and would stay that way rather than moving to passive management, McCullough said, adding that Invesco's global infrastructure presented a major opportunity.
He denied the heavy exposure to the United States would hinder Invesco from making the most of opportunities in other parts of the world. "We would like nothing better than to find opportunities in Asia and Europe," he said.
The merger would enhance the group's strength in the United States and lead to cost savings, officials said.
McCullough said the merger must be approved by Invesco and AIM shareholders and other approvals were required. The deal should be completed early next year, the company said.
British fund manager Invesco announced its widely-expected merger with U.S. mutual fund company AIM Management Group on Monday, creating one of the world's largest investment management businesses.
The combined group will be called AMVESCO Plc and have around $150 billion under management. The merger values AIM at approximately $1.6 billion, Invesco said..
"We are creating a prototype company for the future," Bob McCullough, Invesco's chief financial officer, told Reuters.
But analysts were divided as to the timing of the deal although most were happy to give Invesco the benefit of the doubt as far as its claims on synergy are concerned.
"The deal is exquisitely timed for the AIM shareholders and conversely not so exquisitely for Invesco shareholders," said Martin Cross, analyst at UBS.
Cross argues that Invesco is buying at the top of the Wall Street market which many see as having some very stretched valuations. Cross said that UBS strategists are forecasting a 15 percent downward correction on the Dow Jones index next year which, if it came to pass, would leave AIM looking rather expensive.
But Phillip Gibbs at BZW was upbeat about the merger.
"It looks rather cheap, I think they've done rather nicely," Gibbs said but did add a rider on the possibility of a major correction in the US equities market.
Analysts said the price paid by Invesco was something short of what had been predicted but Cross said it was a "pretty full price but what one might expect for a premium company."
Invesco shares closed unchanged at 237.5p Invesco's chairman and chief executive Charles Brady, the man who will lead the new group, said it would have "the scale necessary for success as a financially strong and independent business operating in an increasingly concentrated industry."
Invesco said it would fund the merger with the issue of 290 million new shares to existing holders of AIM shares. These would be valued at approximately $1.1 billion. AIM shareholders will own around 45 percent of the enlarged group and be subject to restrictions on selling the shares.
McCullough said the merger, which is conditional on approval by both Invesco and AIM shareholders and other approvals, would be non-dilutive and would not have any cost savings built-in. However, there would be cost savings in the future, he said.
The merger is not expected to be completed before February.
McCullough also said the $500 million needed to fund the merger would come in the form of cash and debt, with a one-for-five rights offering on the cards. This would involve issuing roughly 50 million new shares, he said.
McCullough said the cost of the merger was not excessive. "If you look at it on the basis of funds under management, it (the cost) is less than three percent," he said.
"There's no question that it is a lot of money, but we view this as a long-term investment for both of us," he said. This long-term commitment was underlined by the fact that almost 50 percent of the combined shares would be held by management.
The merger presented an enormous number of synergies, with the two companies using different distribution channels and approaches. McCullough said he did not forsee any culture clash between the two.
There would be no change in their differing approaches, with Invesco continuing to be a "no-load" house, selling products direct to the customer, and AIM making its sales through intermediaries.
Both companies were "really active managers" and would stay that way rather than moving to passive management, McCullough said, adding that Invesco's global infrastructure presented a major opportunity.
He denied the heavy exposure to the U.S. would hinder Invesco from making the most of opportunities in other parts of the world. "We would like nothing better than to find opportunities in Asia and Europe," he said.
Britain's Invesco Plc Monday agreed to merge with Houston-based mutual fund company AIM Management Group Inc. in a deal valued at $1.6 billion, creating one of the world's largest investment management businesses.
The combined group will be called Amvesco Plc and have around $150 billion under management. The merger will be paid for with about $1.1 billion in new stock and the rest in cash and debt, Invesco officials said.
"We are creating a prototype company for the future," Bob McCullough, Invesco's chief financial officer, said in an interview.
Invesco Chairman Charles Brady, who will lead the combined group, said it would have "the scale necessary for success as a financially strong and independent business operating in an increasingly concentrated industry."
McCullough stressed the deal was a merger of the two companies, which would focus on growing revenue but retain their individual identities.
Invesco said it would fund the deal by issuing 290 million new shares to AIM shareholders. These would be valued at about $1.1 billion. AIM shareholders will own around 45 percent of the merged company.
McCullough said another $500 million needed to fund the merger would come in the form of cash and debt.
The merger presented a chance for the two companies to use different distribution channels and approaches. McCullough said he did not forsee any culture clash between the two.
There would be no change in their differing approaches, with Invesco continuing to be a "no-load" house, selling products direct to the customer, and AIM selling its nearly three dozen funds through brokers.
McCullough said the cost of the merger was not excessive.
"There's no question that it is a lot of money, but we view this as a long-term investment for both of us," he said. The long-term commitment was underlined by the fact that almost 50 percent of the combined shares would be held by management.
Both companies were "really active managers" and would stay that way rather than moving to passive management, McCullough said, adding that Invesco's global infrastructure presented a major opportunity.
He denied the heavy exposure to the United States would hinder Invesco from making the most of opportunities in other parts of the world. "We would like nothing better than to find opportunities in Asia and Europe," he said.
The merger would enhance the group's strength in the United States and lead to cost savings, officials said.
McCullough said the merger must be approved by Invesco and AIM shareholders and other approvals were required. The deal should be completed early next year, the company said.
British fund manager Invesco announced its widely-flagged merger with U.S. mutual fund company AIM Management Group on Monday, creating one of the world's largest investment management businesses.
The combined group will be called AMVESCO Plc and have around $150 billion under management. The merger values AIM at approximately $1.6 billion, Invesco said in a statement.
"We are creating a prototype company for the future," Bob McCullough, Invesco's chief financial officer, told Reuters.
Invesco's chairman and chief executive Charles Brady, the man who will lead the new group, said it would have "the scale necessary for success as a financially strong and independent business operating in an increasingly concentrated industry."
McCullough stressed the deal was a merger of two companies rather than a takeover, as it had been described in some quarters. The two would combine to focus on revenue enhancement but would retain their individual identities, he added.
"Brand awareness will continue. Both will retain their names in the market place," he said.
Invesco said it would fund the merger with the issue of 290 million new shares to existing holders of AIM shares. These would be valued at approximately $1.1 billion. AIM shareholders will own around 45 percent of the enlarged group and be subject to restrictions on selling the shares.
McCullough said the merger, which is conditional on approval by both Invesco and AIM shareholders and other approvals, would be non-dilutive and would not have any cost savings built-in. However, there would be cost savings in the future, he said.
The merger is not expected to be completed before February.
McCullough also said the $500 million needed to fund the merger would come in the form of cash and debt, with a one-for-five rights offering on the cards. This would involve issuing roughly 50 million new shares, he said.
McCullough said the cost of the merger was not excessive. "If you look at it on the basis of funds under management, it (the cost) is less than three percent," he said.
"There's no question that it is a lot of money, but we view this as a long-term investment for both of us," he said. This long-term commitment was underlined by the fact that almost 50 percent of the combined shares would be held by management.
Invesco had been approached by a number of banks offering it loans, with the debt element being placed with them. Both companies were currently "largely debt free," he said.
The merger presented an enormous number of synergies, with the two companies using different distribution channels and approaches. McCullough said he did not forsee any culture clash between the two.
There would be no change in their differing approaches, with Invesco continuing to be a "no-load" house, selling products direct to the customer, and AIM making its sales through intermediaries.
Both companies were "really active managers" and would stay that way rather than moving to passive management, McCullough said, adding that Invesco's global infrastructure presented a major opportunity.
He denied the heavy exposure to the U.S. would hinder Invesco from making the most of opportunities in other parts of the world. "We would like nothing better than to find opportunities in Asia and Europe," he said.
The merger would enhance the group's strength in the U.S., increasing the amount of its business there from between 85 and 90 percent to around 95 percent.
British property company Greycoat Plc, under fire from a group of shareholders calling for it to be broken up, said on Monday it was confident of getting the support of its institutional shareholders in rejecting the plan.
"I would be very surprised if they (Greycoat's institutional shareholders) would come down on the side of a closing down sale," Greycoat's chief executive Peter Thornton told Reuters.
Thornton said he believed the liquidation proposal by the UK Active Value Fund, which will be put to shareholders in 10-days time, was "ill-conceived and fails to secure shareholder value".  
Earlier Greycoat wrote to its shareholders urging them to reject the resolution, put forward by rebel shareholder Brian Myerson, at an extraordinary general meeting on November 14.
Myerson's Active Value Advisors Ltd (AVA) advises the UK Active Value Fund and is expected to put out its own response to the statement later today.
Last month Myerson said it was time to "unlock the value of Greycoat" as the company's shares stood at a 23 percent discount to the forecast net asset value for 1997.
He said there was "considerable support" for the proposal to dispose of Greycoat's assets and enhance shareholder value.  
Greycoat, which focuses on central London office developments, earlier announced a rise in interim pre-tax profits to 3.8 million stg and predicted a final dividend of 1.2 pence per share.
Thornton said the results showed the company was having a very good year, adding it was well placed to take advantage of favourable investor sentiment on the central London property market. "The whole market is moving in our direction," he said.
The share discount to net asset value had been worsened by the fact that UKAV held 10 percent of the shares and this was overhanging the market, he added.  
Martin Poole, Greycoat's finance director, said the company had got its long-term debt in place, adding that its lender banks were not in any way ruffled by the current uncertainty.
"The novelty has worn off from the bank's point of view," Poole told Reuters. To get rid of the bank debt, which would be required by any liquidation plans, would cost "roughly 10 million stg", he added.
Poole said he expected good growth in the dividend in the medium term, in line with the group's policy of progressively increasing it. "There is no reason why we shouldn't continue at the higher rate of profit," he said.  
While Greycoat does not intend to use further resources on development sites, it is likely to use the cash generated by the sale of its Buckingham Palace Road property for investment.
Thornton said discussions were already underway with several parties, but he stressed the company would not pay over the odds, would not compromise on what it wanted and would not buy anything in the market.
Rather than concentrating on a single asset, there would be two or three purchases or "possibly more". Greycoat had around 50 million stg to spend and this would be geared up to around 50 million stg cash and the same amount of debt, Thornton added.
-- London Newsroom ++ 44 171 542 7719
KPMG, one of the world's big six international accounting and consultancy firms, believes investment in infrastructure and technology has put it on track to hasten revenue growth.
"We would like to be growing faster and are committed to growing faster," Jon Madonna, chairman of KPMG International told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday.
Earlier the group reported an eight percent rise in worldwide revenues for the fiscal year to September 30, 1996 to $8.1 billion, up from $7.5 billion the year before.
Madonna, who earlier this year said revenue growth in excess of 10 percent was a reasonable expectation, said KPMG had invested heavily in infrastructure and technology during the year and this would pay off in terms of further growth.
He said all sides of the business had performed well over the year but stressed that significant growth in revenues was likely to come from the consulting side of the business rather than from the traditional backbone of auditing and tax.
"If you look at where the great opportunity is, its on the consulting side," Madonna said.
While KPMG's growth rate for the year was lower than rival firm Andersen Worldwide, which last month reported a 16 percent increase in 1996 revenues to $9.4 billion, Madonna said he was not disappointed with the firm's result.
When looked at on a dollar-adjusted basis, the 1996 revenue growth was the same as for the previous year, Madonna said.
But there was still work to be done.
"I said a year ago we need to be growing faster. I just think we have got to do a lot better than that. It's a big ship and you don't turn it around in just a few days," he added.
The investment and strategic moves KPMG had made had ensured it would be in a strong position for the future. "The road we are on is the right road".
Madonna said the firm's partners were agreed that the moves it had made over the year were correct and the fact that everybody wanted faster growth confirmed the need for large-scale investments.
"We are making sizeable dollar investments in terms of infrastructure and product development." This included around $500 million a year on technology and "well in excess" of $100 million on products.
For Madonna the key is what the partnership, which employs more than 77,000 people and has more than 6,250 partners, is doing in three years' time.
The strategy which KPMG has embarked on will not be altered to achieve further revenue growth and areas such as developing new products and establishing a framework of common industries and a common infrastructure across the firm's worldwide business will continue.
Madonna, who believes there will be further consolidation among the big accountancy firms, said KPMG will also stick to growing from within rather than through large-scale acquisition.
The number of major accounting firms in the world has dropped from eight in the mid-1980s to six, with a rise in competition from other types of firms.
But Madonna does not see KPMG making any big buys.
"There will be local acquisitions and mergers down the road but I don't think anything big is on the horizon."
Top managers in major financial firms need to be razor-sharp if the world's increasingly complex markets are to run smoothly, however sophisticated the regulatory regime, regulators and politicians said on Thursday.
"Management needs to know its business. (It) sets the ethos of the company," Alistair Darling, spokesman on treasury affairs for Britain's opposition Labour party told a conference on financial regulation and minimising systemic risk.
Examples of where rules had been broken by so-called "rogue traders" were a clear sign of management failure, he said.
Christine Cumming, senior vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, also voiced doubts about management's current ability to deal with regulatory problems.
The health of an institution lay in its management and directors, but they were not necessarily properly armed to deal with problems when they arose, she said.
"Do we prepare directors and managers enough?" Cumming said.
Britain's often criticised regulatory system, which relies heavily on so-called "self-regulation," is also under scrutiny.
Darling said that whichever party won the next general election, due by May 1997, the British regulatory system "will be reformed." But this would not mean "tearing everything up or dramatic change," he added.
He said Labour wanted to establish a regulator with sufficient "clout reputation and stature" to deal with its international counterparts.
But it would not create a "Super-SIB," an enlarged version of the top regulator the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), as some commentators have suggested. A Labour government would also attempt to limit the number of regulations.
Darling's call for minimising the regulatory burden by making it as cost-effective as possible was echoed by most of the speakers at the conference.
Angela Knight, Britain's economic secretary to the Treasury, said the government wants to see a cost-benefit analysis applied to all regulations. If they fail to make sense on this basis then they should not be adopted, she said.
Knight also underlined the dramatic effect on the industry as a whole of the collapse of blue-blooded merchant bank Barings in February 1995 was "a more salutory lesson than any regulation" to other banks and financial institutions.
There were calls from both politicians for interchange between industry and the regulators, so that the experiences on either side of the fence could be carried across by individuals.
But while the idea of the regulators being staffed by people with first-hand industry knowledge won support from many of those attending the meeting, the question of how the pay structure could accomodate such movements was seen by some as a serious obstacle to this system spreading.
And while regulators need to keep up with rapid changes in financial instruments and the industry landscape both on a domestic and a global scale, they can never be expected to be one step ahead of the business they are monitoring.
"Regulators should respond to business realities rather than be ahead of business trends," Sir Andrew Large, chairman of the SIB told the meeting.
This would mean regulators becoming increasingly sophisticated to cope with the changing business environment and having to co-operate more and more with their counterparts in other countries.
"The next generation of supervisors will have to evaluate far more complex information and make far more complex judgements," Large said.
British property company Greycoat is unlikely to crumble under pressure from rebel shareholders who want it broken up or succumb to a merger approach from smaller rival Moorfield Estates, analysts said on Monday.
"I don't think they are on the critical list in any sense or meaning of the word," one analyst said.
A proposal to sell-off Greycoat's assets is due to be put to shareholders at a special meeting on Thursday. It has been put forward by the UK Active Value Fund, which is advised by rebel shareholder Brian Myerson's Active Value Advisers.
UK Active Value Fund bought its 11 percent stake in Greycoat three years ago, rescuing it from receivership. But Myerson's relationship with the firm's management has not run smoothly.
The South African financier's challenge to the Greycoat management has also triggered a proposal by Moorfield Estates involving a share exchange offer for the larger Greycoat, which has so far dismissed the approach.
Moorfield said in a statement on Monday that it had "developed a proposal to add value for all shareholders through a strategy of more active management of the assets of Greycoat".
It said this had been presented to some of Greycoat's larger shareholders, accounting for close to 40 percent of the shares, and an approach had then been made to Greycoat's chairman.
They include merging the two companies by a share exchange and restructuring the assets of the enlarged group.
This would involve a Central London portfolio made up initially of Greycoat's main assets, Embankment Place and 123 Buckingham Palace Road, which would later be demerged.
Moorfield also intends setting up a portfolio of "investment and development property earmarked for immediate disposal to a major property company".
The remainder of the enlarged group would constitute "an investment, trading and development portfolio" and there would be a reorganisation of the management structure to reduce costs by "at least 1.5 million pounds ($2.47 million) per annum", Moorfield said.
While analysts agreed the Moorfield plan was unlikely to succeed, some said there was an opportunity for Greycoat to take over another company with higher profitability so the combined company could capitalise on Greycoat's favourable tax position.
"But they are not going to be flushed out by Thursday," a second property analyst told Reuters, adding that three or four companies had looked "very seriously" at the possibility of joining with Greycoat.
Another possibility would be a larger group such as British Land sweeping up Greycoat, although such an outcome seems remote in the short-term, analysts said.
Myerson's proposed sale of Greycoat's London property assets is seen by some as an unwise "forced sale" which would not achieve shareholder value in what is an improving market.
"Generally speaking a forced sale of their assets would not gain anything in the short term," the first analyst said, adding that with rental growth starting to show through, it made sense to hold onto Greycoat's two largest properties.
"They are vulnerable to any change in market conditions, but it would be a mistake to be forced into a corner and to sell something in a relatively short timescale. It would be totally counterproductive," he added.
But others said the time was right to sell off Greycoat's largest assets. "This is exactly the right time of the cycle (to sell," the second analyst said.
Greycoat shares closed 6.5 pence higher at 155.5 pence while Moorfield shares were unchanged at 30.5 pence. ($1=.6069 Pound)
Final approval for Lloyd's of London's recovery plan edged closer on Wednesday as it declared that over 90 percent of members had accepted a settlement offer aimed at securing the 300-year-old insurance market's future.
Lloyd's said it had been swamped by U.S. investors signing up for its recovery plan after a U.S. appeals court overturned a ruling that had threatened the insurance market's survival. By Wednesday afternoon 66.7 percent of U.S. members had accepted.
"The level of acceptances speaks for itself. Members have made their views toward the reconstruction of Lloyd's abundantly clear," Lloyd's chairman David Rowland said in a statement.
Earlier a Lloyd's spokesman said acceptances from U.S. Names, investors in the market, had flooded in overnight.
Almost half of the 2,700 U.S. Names had until last night held off. Only 53 percent had accepted by Tuesday.
This followed a Baltimore appeal court's decision late on Tuesday to overturn U.S. judge Robert Payne's ruling last Friday to allow U.S. Names more time to consider the plan.
Payne granted an injunction giving U.S. Names more time to consider the plan and ordered Lloyd's to provide further information by September 23. On Tuesday a panel of judges in Baltimore sent the case back to the Virginia district court with orders to dismiss it.
Rowland said he acknowledged many overseas members had deferred their acceptance in the light of the Virginia court judgement and the subsequent Baltimore ruling.
Over the last few days, evidence of support for the Lloyd's proposals among its 34,000 investors worldwide has grown. On Tuesday evening acceptances totalled 82 percent, compared to only 75 percent on Saturday.
Wednesday's noon deadline for accepting the recovery plan, under which Lloyd's proposes Names pay to help reinsure billions of pounds in liabilities into a new company called Equitas, was extended to give all a chance to respond.
Rowland said on Wednesday afternoon that in the circumstances it was "fair and proper" to exercise flexibility in pushing back the deadline for acceptances.
Lloyd's said that any formal, longer-term extension would be subject to a decision by its council at a Thursday meeting at which it would consider "the prospect of declaring the settlement offer acceptances unconditional."
This extension will crucially allow the market enough time to collect the convincing majority of acceptances, especially from U.S. Names, which it needs to prove its own solvency.
Lloyd's problems began in the 1980s when a destructive combination of negligent underwriting, poor investment advice and a sequence of natural disasters conspired to bring about losses of several billion pounds.
Long-standing Names were for the first time in their lives suddenly faced with the prospect of unlimited losses.
The market is due to submit figures to Britain's Department of Trade and Industry next week in an annual solvency test, and file with the U.S. Treasury and New York Insurance Department later next month.
Equitas may lift off in two weeks if all goes as planned. The recovery plan's success increasingly looks likely, but another challenge by U.S. Names has not been ruled out.
However, U.S. legal sources said overnight that, while U.S. investors could in theory attempt to challenge Tuesday's order it would be difficult to do so successfully.
Despite that, one U.S. Name and chief negotiator for an action group known as the American Names Association, Kenneth Chiate, said he expected U.S. Names to appeal the Baltimore ruling.
Final approval for Lloyd's of London's recovery plan edged closer Wednesday as it declared that over 90 percent of members had accepted a settlement offer aimed at securing the 300-year-old insurance market's future.
Lloyd's said it had been swamped by U.S. investors signing up for its recovery plan after a U.S. appeals court overturned a ruling that had threatened the insurance market's survival. By Wednesday afternoon, 66.7 percent of U.S. members had accepted.
"The level of acceptances speaks for itself. Members have made their views toward the reconstruction of Lloyd's abundantly clear," Lloyd's Chairman David Rowland said in a statement.
Earlier, a Lloyd's spokesman said acceptances from U.S. investors in the market, known as Names, had flooded in overnight.
Almost half of the 2,700 U.S. Names had until Tuesday night held off, with only 53 percent accepting by then.
This followed a decision by a federal appeals court in Baltimore Tuesday to overturn U.S. District Court Judge Robert Payne's ruling in Richmond, Va., Friday to allow U.S. Names more time to consider the plan.
Payne granted an injunction giving U.S. Names more time to consider the plan and ordered Lloyd's to provide further information by Sept. 23. On Tuesday, the panel of judges in Baltimore sent the case back to the lower court with orders to dismiss it.
Rowland said he acknowledged that many overseas members had deferred their acceptance in the light of the Virginia court judgment and the subsequent Baltimore ruling.
Over the last few days, evidence of support for the Lloyd's proposals among its 34,000 investors worldwide has grown. On Tuesday evening, acceptances totalled 82 percent, compared with 75 percent Saturday.
Wednesday's noon deadline for accepting the 3.2 billion pounds ($4.7 billion) recovery plan, under which Lloyd's proposes that Names pay to help reinsure billions of pounds in liabilities into a new company called Equitas, was extended to give all a chance to respond.
Rowland said Wednesday afternoon that under the circumstances it was "fair and proper" to exercise flexibility in pushing back the deadline for acceptances.
Lloyd's said that any formal, longer-term extension would be subject to a decision by its council at a Thursday meeting at which it would consider "the prospect of declaring the settlement offer acceptances unconditional."
This extension will give the market enough time to collect the convincing majority of acceptances, especially from U.S. Names, which it needs to prove its own solvency.
Lloyd's problems began in the 1980s when a destructive combination of negligent underwriting, poor investment advice and a sequence of natural disasters conspired to bring about losses of several billion pounds.
Long-standing Names were for the first time in their lives suddenly faced with the prospect of unlimited losses.
The market is due to submit figures to Britain's Department of Trade and Industry next week in an annual solvency test, and file with the U.S. Treasury and New York Insurance Department later next month.
Equitas may lift off in two weeks if all goes as planned. The recovery plan's success increasingly looks likely, but another challenge by U.S. Names has not been ruled out.
However, U.S. legal sources said overnight that while U.S. investors could in theory attempt to challenge Tuesday's order, it would be difficult to do so successfully.
Despite that, one U.S. Name, Kenneth Chiate, who is chief negotiator for a group known as the American Names Association, said he expected U.S. Names to appeal the Baltimore ruling.
British merchant bank Hambros, under fire from a rebel Hong Kong shareholder calling for its breakup, reported a return to first-half profit on Wednesday and said the benefits of restructuring should begin to show through.
"We have great confidence in ourselves and what we are trying to do," Sir Chips Keswick, the group's chief executive, said in an interview.
He dismissed efforts by Hong Kong investment manager Regent Pacific Group, which holds three percent of Hambros, to break up the firm in an attempt to realise shareholder value.
"Regent is a three percent shareholder and is perfectly entitled to (its) views. We are perfectly entitled not to share them," Keswick said.
Hambros reported pretax profits of 35.0 million pounds ($57.81 million) for the first half, compared with a 7.7 million pound loss for the same period in 1995.
Some analysts had forecast pretax profits of up to 45.0 million pounds based on a strong performance by Hambros' estate agent subsidiary Hambro Countrywide.
They also predicted an interim dividend range of between 2.5 and 3.0 pence. In the event the dividend was unchanged at 2.5 pence.
Hambros is among a dwindling list of British investment banks which are the constant subject of takeover speculation. However, it has been seen as one of the less attractive targets due to recent poor performance and major provisions for bad debts.
Bad debt provisions for the period were 5.9 million pounds compared with 23.5 million in the same period in 1995.
Asked about the possibility of Hambros becomin a takeover target for a larger international player, Keswick said a public company was always in the firing line but he was happy with the group's direction.
While he could not talk for shareholders in the group, Keswick said he had the impression from discussions with them in the wake of the Regent Pacific move that they were supportive of changes the company had implemented.
Keswick said the group was on track to replace "low margin vanilla business" with increased return per customer business. It had decided the best strategy was to undergo major upheavals for a year rather than piecemeal changes over a longer period in order to achieve this.
Keswick, who forecast the benefits of the changes could take a year or two to come through, said he was pleased the group had moved back into profit, adding that the Investment Group's result had been particularly good.
But Hambros chairman Lord Hambro warned that profits from this part of the business were not expected to match the first half in the rest of the year.
However, he expected "considerable improvement" from Hambros' subsidiaries and, despite a challenging environment for the group as a whole, prospects were good.
Lord Hambro said he would retire from his post in July 1997 and be succeeded by Keswick.
"Chips will inevitably be a hands-on chairman," Michael Sorkin, deputy chairman of Hambros Bank, said. ($1=.6054 Pound)
British merchant bank Hambros, under fire from a rebel Hong Kong shareholder calling for its breakup, reported a return to first-half profit on Wednesday and said the benefits of restructuring should begin to show through.
"We have great confidence in ourselves and what we are trying to do," said Sir Chips Keswick, group chief executive.
He dismissed efforts by Hong Kong investment manager Regent Pacific Group, which holds three percent of Hambros, to break up the firm in an attempt to realise shareholder value.
"Regent is a three percent shareholder and is perfectly entitled to (its) views. We are perfectly entitled not to share them," Keswick said.
This view was supported by analysts who said the subject of Regent's shareholding and its calls for Hambros to sell its now successful Hambro Countrywide estate agency subsidiary was not raised at their meeting with the company.
Hambros reported pretax profits of 35.0 million pounds ($57.81 million) for the first half, compared with a 7.7 million pound loss for the same period in 1995.
Some analysts had forecast pretax profits of up to 45.0 million pounds based on a strong Hambro Countrywide performance. But they were disappointed by a worse-than-expected showing by Hambros' banking group.
"People are going to be downgrading their figures, they wre expecting better profits from the banking side," an analyst at one large investment bank told Reuters.
He said it was disappointing Hambros had not done better in what were essentially good markets. "Clearly the banking side is struggling to do anything. Countrywide is the star," he added.
Analysts had predicted an interim dividend of 2.5 to 3.0 pence. In the event the dividend was unchanged at 2.5 pence.
Hambros shares closed down 7.5 pence at 245 pence.
Hambros is among a dwindling list of British investment banks which are the constant subject of takeover speculation. But it has been seen as one of the less attractive targets due to recent poor performance and major provisions for bad debts.
"I wouldn't have thought (a takeover) was terribly likely," said one analyst, adding that Hambros did not have the sort of distribution or securities operation an expanding investment bank would be seeking.
Asked whether Hambros was a takeover target, Keswick said a public company was always in the firing line but he was happy with the group's direction.
While he could not talk for shareholders in the group, Keswick said he had the impression from discussions with them in the wake of the Regent Pacific move that they were supportive of changes the company had implemented.
Keswick said it was on track to replace "low margin vanilla business" with increased return per customer business. It had decided it was best to undergo major upheavals for a year rather than piecemeal changes over a longer period to achieve this.
Keswick, who forecast the benefits of the changes could take a year or two to come through, said he was pleased the group had moved back into profit, adding that the Investment Group's result had been particularly good.
But Hambros chairman Lord Hambro warned profits from this part of the business were not expected to match the first half in the rest of the year. But he expected "considerable improvement" from Hambros' subsidiaries and, despite a challenging environment for the group, prospects were good.
Lord Hambro said he would retire from his post in July 1997 and be succeeded by Keswick. "Chips will inevitably be a hands-on chairman," Michael Sorkin, deputy chairman of Hambros Bank, said.
($1=.6054 Pound)
Shareholders in British property company Greycoat on Thursday left a large question-mark hanging over the future of the group, which is currently facing a break-up demand and a merger proposal from a smaller rival.
Greycoat shareholders postponed for three weeks a vote on a proposal to sell off the company's 500 million pounds ($831.5 million) portfolio in anticipation of talks with predator Moorfield Estates, run by two former Goldman Sachs property analysts.
But Greycoat said it still has to see concrete proposals from Moorfield, which wants a paper merger of the two and then a possible de-merger of Greycoat's largest property assets.
"We have yet to see any detailed proposals from Moorfield. As we keep saying we will consider those proposals once they are received. So far we have only seen one page of vague bullet points," a Greycoat spokesman told Reuters.
The rebel investment fund shareholders which put forward the break-up resolution are the UK Active Value Fund, IMP UKAV Inc and Chaddesley Investments. They control 11 percent of the shares and are advised by Brian Myerson's Active Value Advisors.
But at an extraordinary general meeting South African Myerson asked shareholders to put off a vote on their proposals for a controlled programme of disposals which he has said would significantly enhance shareholder value.
This change in strategy came after Greycoat's chairman Michael Beckett told the meeting it had asked Moorfield to come up with a "full and detailed proposal" which, if forthcoming, it would "consider carefully".
After a vote on postponement, carried by 53 million shares in favour versus about 42 million shares against, Myerson said, "It's an overwhelming vote in favour of shareholder choice. We are supportive of Moorfield in terms of its proposals. We want the board to sit down with them."
Greycoat, which specialises in London property, said last week that the break-up resolution was not in shareholders' best interests and urged them to reject it.
But news of the Moorfield approach surfaced over the weekend, adding another dimension to the uncertainty already hanging over the company and according to some analysts, holding down its share price which closed at 155-1/2p on Thursday.
Moorfield said earlier this week that it would de-merge Greycoat's largest assets, its Embankment Place and 123 Buckingham Palace Road properties, and had earmarked some of its developments for immediate sale to a large property company.
It said it plans to bring the remainder of the enlarged group's assets into an investment, trading and development portfolio and reorganise the board and management structure to reduce costs by at least 1.5 million pounds a year.
Myerson told reporters after the meeting that the British property company would now be forced to talk to Moorfield. "The (Greycoat) board will be forced to sit down and look at the Moorfield proposals," he said.
Myerson said he was delighted shareholders had voted to adjourn his original proposal and repeated that his main object was to create shareholder value.
He added the Moorfield proposals, which have so far been rejected by Greycoat as being too vague, had the backing of holders of 40 percent of Greycoat shares
Myerson said these holders had already seen Moorfield's 40-page document and expressed their support for it, adding that he was "supportive" of both the proposals and the Moorfield management.
"We are supportive of Moorfield in terms of its proposals and we want it (the board) to sit down with them...We expect Moorfield to refine its proposals over the next couple of weeks," he added. ($ = 0.601 British Pounds)
Britain's investment watchdog on Thursday punished companies in the Robert Fleming group for rule breaches, with fines totalling 700,000 pounds ($1.09 million).
At the same time Hong Kong authorities secured voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million from a company jointly owned by the Jardine Matheson and Robert Fleming groups.
Britain's IMRO (the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation) handed down a 400,000 pound fine to Robert Fleming Asset Management (RFAM) and 100,000 pound penalties to three other firms in the group, while Hong Kong's SFC (Securities and Futures Commission) agreed the compensation package.
Failings exposed by the investigation were accepted by Robert Fleming Asset Management, which regretted the breaches. "We are embarrassed by it, there's no doubt about that," Paul Bateman, RFAM's chairman told Reuters in an interview.
The disciplinary action resulted from a five-month joint investigation by IMRO and the SFC into dealing procedures at Jardine Fleming Investment Management (JFIM) and related companies, with the co-operation of all the firms involved.
JFIM is a member of the Jardine Fleming group,
The probe revealed Colin Armstrong, a former senior fund manager and director of JFIM had engaged in late allocation of deals after changes in the price of the instruments traded had occurred, the SFC said.
His actions had resulted in three accounts managed by JFIM losing money and led to the group agreeing to make voluntary payments totalling $19.3 million to compensate these clients.
Armstrong made "substantial profits from trading in Japanese exchange traded options" for his own account, the SFC said. He has since cooperated With JFIM and had paid back any gains.
This has been used by JFIM as part of the compensation.
"The heart of the problem is JFIM. The weakness was their back office and procedures were not up to IMRO standards," said Bateman, adding the problem had been isolated to one fund manager, but said it had exposed systemic weakness.
With hindsight he acknowledged that these procedural and compliance monitoring problems could and should have been spotted earlier but said it was difficult to tell how much quicker it could have been dealt with, although there had been a steady increase in the management response.
Armstrong's behaviour had been an abuse of trust, but no decision had yet been made over whether it would result in court action, he added. Bateman said Armstrong had accepted the SFC termination of his registration as an investment adviser and securities dealer. ApaRt from fining the Robert Fleming subsidiaries that had delegated fund management of 1.2 billion pounds to JFIM, IMRO ended the registration of Robert Thomas, the former chief executive of JFAM and JFIM, who accepted he "bore ultimate responsibility for the compliance failures in the companies". JFAM has also had its authorisation brought to an end and the Jardine Fleming and Robert Fleming groups will offer its 10 customers
But IMRO denied the penalties were insufficient either as punishment or a deterrent against future breaches. "It always sends out a message to others when we take out a disciplinary action," an IMRO official told Reuters, adding the fines matched the scale of the breaches and the negative publicity would also have an effect.
Bateman said the Robert Fleming group would be in close contact with all of its clients, but said he did not expect any material loss from the findings and clients had so far been "understanding of the position". ($1=.6412 Pound)
Privately owned British investment bank Robert Fleming on Wednesday announced increased pre-tax profits for the first half of the year which it said underlined its ability to remain independent.
"We are committed to remaining independent. These results, our second best interim results ever, show we can remain independent," a Robert Fleming spokesman told Reuters.
Flemings has been widely talked about as a possible takeover target for a larger foreign investment bank, but has resolutely said it would retain its independence.
Flemings said its pretax profit for the first half of the year had increased by 16 percent to 92.2 million pounds ($154 million), from 79.4 million pounds a year earlier but warned it would have to cope with difficult markets in the second half.
Some analysts said the increase was not particularly impressive given market conditions but chief executive John Manser said it was "a very good start" and showed new businesses were "making a valuable contribution to profitability."
"While the outlook for the year seems promising, flat Asian markets and heightened competitive pressures in other markets are factors that we will continue to have to contend with during the next six months," Manser said in a statement.
The Flemings official said the results showed that while Flemings may have been perceived as an Asian-centric bank, it was now a much more international operation and had succeeded in bringing down its cost income ratio.
Flemings has not had an easy year so far. In July it lost investment banking head Bill Harrison who was poached by BZW, the investment banking arm of Britain's Barclays.
And in August Jardine Fleming, a joint venture with Jardine Matheson, revealed a five-month probe by British and Hong Kong regulators into irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
This resulted in hefty fines and voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million to clients. Regulators also withdrew the authorisation of Jardine Fleming's London-based fund company. In September the company's chairman retired and the group created a new supervisory board.
Flemings acknowledged the problems at Jardine Fleming meant the joint venture had recorded a "marginally lower" interim result than its net interim profit of $63.9 million in 1995.
This was after taking into account provisions "arising from the regulatory issues relating to earlier years," it said. The Flemings spokesman told Reuters some clients had been lost, but new clients had also been taken on.
He described the events as a "painful experience." "But we believe we have clearly drawn a line in the sand," he added.
Any impact these problems may have had on Flemings' overall business was not, however, reflected in the interim dividend which rose to eight pence per share from seven pence.
Flemings said it had seen strong profit growth from its fund management businesses adding that its securities business had reported "a marked increase in profits aided by a strong performance by UK and continental European broking."
Its capital markets arm had helped companies raise 13.4 billion pounds of new capital while its corporate finance division had completed 43 deals during the period.
The appointment of Manser, 56, to replace Robin Fleming, 64, who will retire as chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings at the end of March 1997, means Manser would be more involved in business development and winning new business as well as strategy and relationships with major clients and shareholders.
William Garrett, 50, who was hired by Manser as a fund manager in 1970, was named as his replacement as chief executive and chairman of the group executive committee. Garrett will be responsible for the day-to-day running of the group.
Privately-owned British investment bank Robert Fleming on Wednesday announced increased pre-tax profits for the first half of the year but warned it would have to contend with some difficult markets in the second half.
Flemings said its pretax profit for the first half of the year had increased by 16 percent to 92.2 million pounds ($154 million), from 79.4 million pounds a year earlier.
Some analysts said the increase was not particularly impressive given market conditions but chief executive John Manser said it was "a very good start" and showed new businesses were "making a valuable contribution to profitability".
"While the outlook for the year seems promising, flat Asian markets and heightened competitive pressures in other markets are factors that we will continue to have to contend with during the next six months," Manser said in a statement.
But one analyst, who declined to be named, said the group would have given a more precise break-down of the performance of its various arms if the results had been outstanding.
Flemings has not had an easy year so far. In July it lost investment banking head Bill Harrison who was poached by BZW, the investment banking arm of Britain's Barclays.
And in August Jardine Fleming, a joint venture with Jardine Matheson, revealed a five-month probe by British and Hong Kong regulators into irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
This resulted in hefty fines and voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million to clients. Regulators also withdrew the authorisation of Jardine Fleming's London-based fund company. In September the company's chairman retired and the group created a new supervisory board.
In its interim results on Wednesday Robert Fleming acknowledged that the problems at Jardine Fleming meant the joint venture had recorded a "marginally lower" interim result than its net interim profit of $63.9 million in 1995.
This was after taking into account provisions "arising from the regulatory issues relating to earlier years", it said. But despite widespread speculation that Jardine Fleming would lose clients as a result of the scandal, it recorded a net trading profit of $82.0 million, an increase of 28 percent.
Robert Fleming said "the shortcomings which gave rise to these problems have been fully addressed", management had been strengthened and the Jardine Fleming businesses were fully compliant with "local and UK regulation and controls".
They were "being further upgraded to bring them completely in line with best international practice," it added.
Any impact these problems may have had on Flemings' overall business was not, however, reflected in the interim dividend paid by Robert Fleming, which announced an increased dividend of 8.0 pence per share, from 7.0 pence.
Flemings said it had seen strong profit growth from its fund management businesses and its securities business had reported "a marked increase in profits aided by a strong performance by UK and continental European broking".
Its capital markets arm had helped companies raise 13.4 billion pounds of new capital while its corporate finance division had completed 43 deals during the period.
It also announced that Manser will replace Robin Fleming who will retire as chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings at the end of March 1997. William Garrett was named as replacement chief executive and chairman of the group executive committee.
Other moves include Peter Jamieson becoming chairman of Robert Fleming &amp; Co and Lawrence Banks who will join him as deputy chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings.
Privately-owned British investment bank Robert Fleming on Wednesday announced increased pre-tax profits for the first half of the year which it said underlined its ability to remain independent.
"We are committed to remaining independent. These results, our second best interim results ever, show we can remain independent," a Robert Fleming spokesman told Reuters.
Flemings has been widely talked about as a possible takeover target for a larger foreign investment bank, but has resolutely said it would retain its independence.
Flemings said its pretax profit for the first half of the year had increased by 16 percent to 92.2 million pounds ($154 million), from 79.4 million pounds a year earlier but warned it would have to cope with difficult markets in the second half.
Some analysts said the increase was not particularly impressive given market conditions but chief executive John Manser said it was "a very good start" and showed new businesses were "making a valuable contribution to profitability."
"While the outlook for the year seems promising, flat Asian markets and heightened competitive pressures in other markets are factors that we will continue to have to contend with during the next six months," Manser said in a statement.
The Flemings official said the results showed that while Flemings may have been perceived as an Asian-centric bank, it was now a much more international operation and had succeeded in bringing down its cost income ratio.
Flemings has not had an easy year so far. In July it lost investment banking head Bill Harrison who was poached by BZW, the investment banking arm of Britain's Barclays.
And in August Jardine Fleming, a joint venture with Jardine Matheson, revealed a five-month probe by British and Hong Kong regulators into irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
This resulted in hefty fines and voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million to clients. Regulators also withdrew the authorisation of Jardine Fleming's London-based fund company. In September the company's chairman retired and the group created a new supervisory board.
Flemings acknowledged the problems at Jardine Fleming meant the joint venture had recorded a "marginally lower" interim result than its net interim profit of $63.9 million in 1995.
This was after taking into account provisions "arising from the regulatory issues relating to earlier years," it said. The Flemings spokesman told Reuters some clients had been lost, but new clients had also been taken on.
He described the events as a "painful experience." "But we believe we have clearly drawn a line in the sand," he added.
Any impact these problems may have had on Flemings' overall business was not, however, reflected in the interim dividend which rose to eight pence per share from seven pence.
Flemings said it had seen strong profit growth from its fund management businesses adding that its securities business had reported "a marked increase in profits aided by a strong performance by UK and continental European broking."
Its capital markets arm had helped companies raise 13.4 billion pounds of new capital while its corporate finance division had completed 43 deals during the period.
The appointment of Manser, 56, to replace Robin Fleming, 64, who will retire as chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings at the end of March 1997, means Manser would be more involved in business development and winning new business as well as strategy and relationships with major clients and shareholders.
William Garrett, 50, who was hired by Manser as a fund manager in 1970, was named as his replacement as chief executive and chairman of the group executive committee. Garrett will be responsible for the day-to-day running of the group.
Mention moneylending to most Britons and their instant reaction is "you mean loan-sharks!".
But Britain's established credit companies, which lend to people unable to borrow from the high street banks or credit card companies, say the public image of menacing debt collectors is a far cry from how they conduct their regulated business.
"We are credit collectors. A debt collector is someone who has no relationship with the customer. It's a totally different process," says Eddie Cran, chief executive of the financial services group Cattle's, which runs door-to-door moneylenders Shopacheck.
Such firms are tied closely to the wheeling and dealing of the City of London. Provident Financial, Cattle's and London Scottish Bank are all publicly quoted, profitable firms paying shareholders annual dividends.
People who borrow from them may have had minor civil court judgements against them, be unemployed or simply not want to have bank accounts or credit cards. The firms provide a service others -- except for unregulated outfits -- will not, and while it won't cost a pound of flesh, it is not cheap.
To those used to credit cards or in-store credit the rates may appear outrageously high. But credit companies point out they include major costs such as collection and insurance, are agreed in advance and do not rise if a payment is missed.
So while interest rates may be at all-time lows, these service charges mean the APRs (annualised percentage rate) can exceed 150 percent. To borrow 100 pounds ($167) over 25 weeks from Shopacheck with a five pound weekly repayment costs 25 pounds.
Shopacheck, which started in the 1930s in northeast England, has 2,800 agents. Its average loan is for six months, the average amount 150 pounds and average indebtedness 350 pounds.
STREET COLLECTING
Only a few miles from the City, but a million miles from its hefty salaries and bonuses, Kathy, a self-employed agent for Shopacheck, does her weekly door-to-door collection of debt repayments through the streets of northwest London.
The terraced suburban houses at which she stops are remarkably average. Most have front gardens, some are neatly laid out with blooming rose bushes while others are less well-kept, with tatty patches of litter-strewn grass.
Inside there are the usual consumer trappings of late 1990s British life.
Televisions, video-recorders, washing machines and microwave ovens, even the odd fish tank, are all in evidence, especially when crammed into a small council flat along with children, their toys, pets and piles of ironing.
At each house Kathy, a 37-year-old mother of three, collects sums ranging from two pounds fifty to 20 pounds.
Some customers take loans in the form of vouchers which can be spent only at certain high street shops, while others use the retail service offered by Shopacheck and buy items such as bed linen, beds or barbeques from the firm's own catalogue.
Most of her clients seem to welcome her as a friend, they expect her visits and have the money ready to hand to her. Kathy says that, after eight years, she is a treated as a long-standing family friend or agony aunt by many of them.
Only at one home does the son of the house come to the door and tell Kathy that his mother isn't in. "Fine, can you tell her I'll see her as usual next week," says Kathy.
But getting money back isn't always this easy.
Kathy admits that if a customer threatens her, she passes the problem back to the company, which says it instructs its self-employed agents not to take personal risks.
MONEYLENDERS PLUG GAP IN FINANCIAL SERVICES
"The one thing about credit is that it is easy to give but much harder to get back," says Paul Oliver, a Shopacheck regional manager who has been in the business for 27 years as customer, agent and manager.
He is not alone as a successful businessman who has made use of Britain's long-standing system of moneylending. The managing director of one British bank confided he would not be where he is today had it not been for a money lending firm.
His family could not afford to buy him a suit for an interview. He took a loan, bought the essential attire, got his first job and set himself on the path to greater things.
Oliver says nine out of 10 times business is conducted with the woman of the house and although bad debts are expected, they only reach about four percent a year, which is good going for a business the mainstream lenders won't touch because of the risk.
A recent television documentary showed some moneylenders breaking rules laid down by the Consumer Credit Act. Oliver says he deals harshly with anyone who steps outside the rules.
For Cran firms such as his are plugging a gap in Britain's financial services marketplace and he is keen to correct what he sees as "untrue perceptions" about the business. "What we are actually attempting to do is to deal with customers who cannot get credit through the mainstream lenders," Cran told Reuters.
"It (door-to-door lending) is very high cost and very personal. We have to train people to look after a number of customers," he added. A customer who fails to pay is only pursued through the courts "as a very last measure" and only in "very extreme circumstances" is an outside firm called in.
Cran says Cattle's target market is about five-and-a-half million people, around two million of whom need the discipline of an agent calling to collect every week.
But the stigma involved means Cattle's also offers Welcome, a loans service for people who have bank accounts and pay by direct debit. This "requires a very high rejection rate and an in-depth granting procedure", Cran says.
SHAREHOLDERS REAP THE DIVIDENDS
For Cattle's and its competitors credit is a lucrative business. In September it reported increased pre-tax profits for the first six months of the year of nearly 15.0 million pounds. In 1995 its shareholders received a total dividend of 6.9 pence.
In August Provident Financial, the sector's biggest player, reported first half pre-tax profits of 47.5 million pounds. It said it had seen continued growth in home collected credit and was confident of a "good result" for the year as a whole.
But for customers, things might not be so rosy. While most manage to pay back their loans, some do not. Kathy soon spots trouble. "You can see they are struggling if they start having to scrabble around for pennies," she says. ($1=.5990 Pound)
British venture capital firm 3i Group Plc on Thursday reported a rise in first half net asset value (NAV) per share and revenue profits but said it had been held back by continental Europe and a strong pound.
3i's NAV for the period rose to 454 pence per share, from 426 pence in the first half last year, while profit before tax rose to 62.9 million pounds ($106 million) from 54.3 million.
"Its a pretty healthy increase. Its held back a bit by continental Europe...the markets have not been that good and there has also been the appreciation of sterling," Ewen Macpherson, 3i's chief executive said in an interview.
Macpherson said a better indication of the group's performance was its British portfolio which had performed "extremely well", reflected in an 18 percent growth in revenue.
There were still plenty of opportunities available, he said, with the sort of companies that 3i invested in doing very well.
There had also been an improvement in general business confidence in Britain, which had improved for the fourth consecutive quarter, according to 3i's latest "Enterprise Barometer" survey.
Of 327 million pounds invested by 3i during the period, 284 million was in Britain.
Macpherson said the prospect of a general election in Britain by May 1997, had resulted in a number of investment opportunities for 3i as some company founders or management teams decided to sell their corporate holdings while the tax regime remained clear.
While the European performance had an impact on the NAV figure, the investment opportunities for 3i on the continent remained good, Macpherson said. Current pricing levels for small and medium-sized European companies in which the group invests were "very attractive".
During the first half of the year, realisation of investments continued at an encouraging rate, with sales worth 122 million pounds in Britain and some 36 million pounds in continental Europe.
Macpherson said the group had "significant plans to expand in Europe" and this was reflected in its decision to open an office in the German city of Duesseldorf in January.
This regionalisation would also involve opening offices in three other German cities -- Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart -- and the group also plans to extend its presence into the south of France.
The group said it wanted to open its first office in Southeast Asia, in Singapore, early in 1997.
Macpherson said Asia was "an exciting part of the world" for investment capital and Singapore had been chosen as it was a good communication centre from which other parts of the region could be covered.
He said the office would look at opportunities in Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia but not in China. ($1=.5956 Pound)
UK investment capital group 3i Group Plc said on Thursday the increase in its first half net asset value (NAV) per share was healthy but had been partly held back by continental Europe and a strong pound.
"Its a pretty healthy increase. Its held back a bit by continental Europe...the markets have not been that good and there has also been the appreciation of sterling," Ewen Macpherson, 3i's chief executive told Reuters.
3i's NAV for the period rose to 454 pence per share, from 426 pence for the same period the previous year.  
Macpherson said a better indication of the group's performance was its UK portfolio which had performed "extremely well", reflected in an 18 percent growth in revenue.
He said there were still plenty of opportunities available, with the sort of companies that 3i invested in doing very well. There had also been an improvement in general business confidence in the UK, which had improved for the fourth consecutive quarter according to 3i's latest survey.
"The confidence in the businesses underlying our portfolio has been so positive," he said. Of 327.3 million stg invested by 3i during the period, 284.2 million stg was in the UK.  
Macpherson said the prospect of a general election in the UK, which must be held by May 1997, had resulted in a number of investment opportunities for 3i as some company founders or management teams decided to sell their holdings in a firm while there was no doubt about the tax implications.
While the European performance had an impact on the NAV figure, the investment opportunities for 3i on the continent remained good, Macpherson said, adding that current pricing levels for the small and medium-sized European companies in which the group invests were "very attractive".  
During the first half of the year, 3i said, realisations on investments had continued "at an encouraging rate". It realised investments of 122.2 million stg in the UK and 35.9 million stg in continental Europe.
Macpherson said the group had "significant plans to expand in Europe" and this was reflected in its decision to open an office in Dusseldorf, Germany in January. This regionalisation would involve opening offices in Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart.
And the group was also planning to extend its presence into the south of France, he added.  
The group also announced it would open its first office in South East Asia, in Singapore, early in 1997.
Macpherson said the area was "an exciting part of the world" for investment capital and Singapore had been chosen as it was a good communication centre from which other parts of the region could be covered.
He said the office would start small, with a staff of three, and would have a maximum of "half-a-dozen" people for the first year or so and would look at opportunities in Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia but not in China.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7719
The British arm of accountancy firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, auditors for failed British bank Barings, said on Friday it had issued third party proceedings against nine former directors and employees of the bank.
"Despite the fact that we are not responsible for the collapse of Barings, we face a substantial claim. We are perceived to have deep pockets which are available to those who have lost money while those who were really responsible for the collapse of Barings escape," Coopers said in a statement.
"We may also take additional third party proceedings against other members of Barings management in due course," it added.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand's British firm was auditor for Barings Plc, the parent company. Barings was rescued by Dutch financial giant ING Groep after it collapsed in February 1995 under losses of around $1.4 billion run up by the unauthorised derivatives trades of Singapore-based Nick Leeson.
Leeson is currently serving a six-and-a-half year jail sentence in Singapore for his part in the bank's downfall.
Ernst &amp; Young, administrators to the bank, later issued claims of negligence in audits against accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand in London and Singapore and Deloitte &amp; Touche in Singapore.
Some commentators estimate the total amount of these writs, which have not been specified, to be around 1.0 billion pounds ($1.68 billion). A Coopers &amp; Lybrand official in London said no amount had been specified on the writ issued against it.
A spokesman at Ernst &amp; Young told Reuters the firm was aware of the third party writs issued by Coopers but said that it was "inappropriate to comment at this stage."
The Coopers &amp; Lybrand official said the third party writs against the nine former Barings directors and employees had not yet been served, adding it had four months in which to do so.
The firm said in a statement that the writs had been issued in the Chancery Division of the High Court against former Baring Investment Bank head Peter Norris and former deputy chairman Andrew Tuckey as well as Ron Baker, Mary Walz, Ian Hopkins, Anthony Gamby, Geoffrey Broadhurst, James Bax and Simon Jones.
Baker's lawyer, Lindsay Hill of law firm Fox Williams, told Reuters he was surprised Coopers &amp; Lybrand had taken the action against Baker.
"I am surprised that Coopers &amp; Lybrand should have taken this sort of action against Mr. Baker. I think the way events have unfolded before the SFA (Securities and Futures Authority) have demonstrated that he has not been in breach of any of his obligations or duties as a director," Hill said.
He said he did not expect Coopers &amp; Lybrand to be successful in any claim against Baker and suggested that issuing the writs had been "a tactical move intended to divert attention away from the main action."
Earlier this month Baker was cleared of most misconduct charges brought by the SFA, a British financial markets watchdog, after a hearing by an independent tribunal.
Norris, who along with Broadhurst was banned from working in the City of London by the SFA in May, could not be contacted by Reuters.
Tuckey, who was deputy chairman of Barings, was not disciplined by the SFA. In March the SFA said it "found no evidence indicating that the insolvency of the group" could be attributed to his actions.
But he had to assure the SFA he would not seek any position in an investment house which would require his registration by the SFA as a senior executive officer or as a director unless his duties were limited to giving corporate finance advice.
Gamby was reprimanded by the SFA in August. He had his registration as a director suspended for a year and was required to pay 5,000 pounds towards costs.
SFA proceedings against Walz, Hopkins and Bax have yet to be concluded, while Jones was not regulated by the watchdog. ($1=.5953 Pound)
Singapore's Hotel Properties and property group Canary Wharf on Friday applied for detailed planning consent for a development aimed at injecting life into an office-dominated area of London's former docks.
"Life means people who stay here. We looked at what was lacking (in Canary Wharf) and that was life," Thio Gim Hock, executive director of HPL, told Reuters in an interview.
HPL and Canary Wharf, which is owned by an international consortium led by Paul Reichmann and including Prince Al Waleed bin Talal bin Abdulaziz al Saud of Saudi Arabia, formed an 80-20 joint venture for the residential, hotel and leisure project.
The multi-million pound scheme represents the first phase of development of an 11-acre (4.5 hectare) site adjoining the River Thames. It will be part of the landmark Canary Wharf docklands development to the east of the City financial district, home to Britain's tallest building.
The development will be the first at the massive Canary Wharf site since an agreement last year by banks to sell out to the Reichmann-led consortium. The banks had taken over the ownership when the original development company went into administration.
Despite these problems, 80 percent of the offices have now been occupied and Canary Wharf is vying with the London's traditional financial heartland as a site for large global investment banks to locate their new headquarters.
Office blocks have so far dominated the site, however, and Thio Gim Hock said he expects to start building 330 residential units, a five star hotel and sports club early in 1997. They are due to be completed by the end of 1998 or early 1999.
There is already outline planning permission from the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to develop the site and Canary Wharf's Robert John, a director of the joint venture, believes detailed permission should be granted.
An initial capitalisation of 50 million pounds ($83.95 million) will come from the partners. Further funding is expected to come from sale of apartments and bank loans, although Thio Gim Hock would not be drawn on the financing.
HPL, which has a stake in Britain's Virgin Cinemas as well as interests in hotels such as Four Seasons and residential developments, said in July the Canary Wharf scheme would cost around 250 million pounds, although the total cost is likely to be higher given the estimates for the first phase.
Designer Philippe Stark is to shape the hotel and leisure component of the new development, which will include a glass-covered "infinity" swimming pool which will give the appearance of dropping into the river Thames below.
Thio Gim Hock said Stark will "give some sex appeal to the development", which he says will have a country club atmosphere. He wants the hotel to have its own distinctive character which will be "elegant, understated and aimed at business people".
The developers also envisage opportunities for top-class restaurants with river views on the site.
He expects many of the apartments to be sold to people in Britain, but also hopes for overseas interest and foresees some buyers seeking an investment rather than a place to live. HPL's track-record in Singapore will, he said, encourage interest from the company's home patch.
"I have no doubt that a lot of them will come and buy here."
Work on the Canary Wharf project in the former London docks began in 1987 under Olympia and York, owned by the Reichmann family of Canada.
But in May 1992 Olympia and York Canary Wharf Ltd went into administration and was rescued by a group of banks that had financed the project in October 1993. ($1=.5956 Pound)
Embattled British property company Greycoat had the immediate threat of a shareholder call for its break-up removed on Thursday, but the firm still faced an unwanted merger proposal from a smaller rival.
Greycoat welcomed an overwhelming vote against the breakup resolution put forward by the UK Active Value Fund (UKAV) and chief executive Peter Thornton said he hoped the group could now get on with its normal business.
"It has cost us a lot of money and a lot of wasted effort and time. What we would like to do is get on with running a property company," Thornton said in an interview.
He was speaking after the vote by Greycoat shareholders on UKAV's call for the sale of all Greycoat's 500 million pound ($811.6 million) assets. Among Greycoat sharholders, 95 percent of those who voted, representing 55 percent of the share capital, voted against the sale.
Shares in Greycoat closed unchanged at 163.5 pence, compared with a year high of 168 pence and a low of 130 pence.
UKAV, which is advised by South African Brian Myerson's Active Value Advisers, said on Wednesday it would abstain at the reconvened extraordinary general meeting.
It argued it had already achieved one of its main aims, the sale of Greycoat's largest asset, Embankment Place, on the River Thames in central London.
It now thought a merger proposal from Moorfield Estates had "considerable merit and could better serve the interests of Greycoat shareholders".
Thornton welcomed the fact that one uncertain element surrrounding the group was over, adding Greycoat had yet to receive the answers needed about the Moorfield merger proposal.
"We still haven't received answers to our 30-odd questions," he said of the Moorfield approach, adding Greycoat was not prepared to embark on a due diligence exercise or open its books to Moorfield without more concrete details of the firm's plans.
Moorfield has suggested demerging Greycoat's largest assets, but Thornton said it had yet to convince him it had proposals that would work.
Moorfield shares were also unchanged at 30.5 pence, compared with a year high of 34 pence and a low of 24 pence.
Thornton said relations with potential purchasers had been established but there were fairly few buyers in the world able to pay more than 200 million pounds ($324.6 million).
But he said he could not quantify how much losing the opportunity of an "off market" sale might shave off the sale price. ($1=.6161 Pound)
British property group MEPC on Thursday announced a 14 percent increase in pretax profits for the year but said a writedown on a Los Angeles shopping mall had reduced its net asset value (NAV).
MEPC's chief executive said he was pleased with the rise in pretax profits to 140 million pounds ($227.2 million) from 122.6 million pounds the previous year, but admitted disappointment at the fall in NAV to 450 pence per share from 457 pence.
MEPC shares were 11p lower at 441-1/2p by 1218 GMT as traders said the NAV was below market expectations.
"We feel very confident about the whole of the profit statement. The only slight disappointment is on the NAV side," Tuckey said in an interview. Earnings per share rose nine percent to 22.9 pence and the total dividend stayed at 20 pence.
Tuckey said the NAV drop reflected a marginal fall in values both in Britain and elsewhere but it was less than the relevant indices. "We feel that the performance of our UK portfolio, which accounts for 70 percent of the group, is indeed where we would have expected it to be."
He pointed out the valuation date for the portfolio was August 31 and there had been activity and evidence of an improved market since then. "If we redid the valuation for December 1, we would probably get a different answer," he said.
The other factor which had brought the NAV down was the 31 million pound write-down on the valuation of MEPC's Northridge Mall. This had been equivalent to 7.5 pence per share.
"We are convinced this is a temporary write-down because the centre is still getting back on its feet after the earthquake some three years ago. We are quite confident we will get that value back in the next two to three years as the centre re-establishes itself," he said.
And he defended MEPC's decision to give a target NAV of 690 pence per share for 2001.
"We're sticking our necks out...The portfolio is very very different to what it was three years ago and what we're trying to do is give shareholders some feel of where we think the performance is going to be in five years time," Tuckey said.
Tuckey said the full impact of the change of strategy in MEPC's portfolio would take time but there would be progress towards the firm's targets each year.
He said there was a much firmer tone to the markets, particularly in Britain over the last few months. Apart from Northridge, the rest of the U.S. portfolio had performed "extremely well".
MEPC plans to keep the lion's share of its portfolio in Britain, with the remainder in the United States and Australia. It has wound down its European portfolio and has no plans to go back into continental Europe in the immediate future.
Tuckey said the group was keen to make acquisitions, with the proceeds of its European disposals, but that there was a shortage of good stock available, particularly in Britain.
While MEPC has resolved to increase the dividend paid to shareholders, Tuckey said he could not predict when it would be increased although he pointed out that dividend cover had improved to 1.15 times from 1.05 a year before.
"It depends on the forward look, on how the markets are feeling," he said. The market was competitive and good stock was hard to find but Tuckey said he welcomed the prospect of changes to the way the market functioned with more liquidity likely.
($1=.6161 Pound)
British property group MEPC said on Thursday it was pleased with a rise in pretax profits for the year but admitted disappointment at a fall in its net asset value (NAV) to 450 pence per share from 457 pence.
"We feel very confident about the whole of the profit statement. The only slight disappointment is on the NAV side," James Tuckey, MEPC's chief executive, said in an interview.
Earlier MEPC announced a 14 percent increase in pretax profit for the year to 140 million stg from 122.6 million stg. Earnings per share rose nine percent to 22.9 pence.  
Tuckey said the NAV fall reflected a marginal fall in values both in Britain and elsewhere but said the NAV drop was less than the relevant indices.
"We feel that the performance of our UK portfolio, which accounts for 70 percent of the group, is indeed where we would have expected it to be," he added.
He pointed out the valuation date was August 31 and there had been activity and evidence of an improvement in the market since then. "If we redid the valuation for December 1, we would probably get a different answer," he said.  
Tuckey said the other factor which had brought the NAV down was a significant 31 million stg write-down on the valuation of MEPC's Northridge Mall in Los Angeles. This had been equivalent to 7.5 pence per share.
"We are convinced this is a temporary write-down because the centre is still getting back on its feet after the earthquake some three years ago. We are quite confident we will get that value back in the next two to three years as the centre re-establishes itself," Tuckey said.
"We felt that we wanted to share as much information as we could with shareholders," he added.  
MEPC's decision to give a target NAV of 690 pence per share for 2001 reflected its repositioning of its portfolio.
"We're sticking our necks out...The portfolio is very very different to what it was three years ago and what we're trying to do is give shareholders some feel of where we think the performance is going to be in five years time," Tuckey said.
"We believe we need to share with our stakeholders what it is we are trying to achieve."
Tuckey said the full impact of the change of strategy in MEPC's portfolio would take time but there would be progress towards the firm's targets each year.  
He said there was a much firmer tone to the markets, particularly in the UK over the last few months. Apart from Northridge, the rest of the U.S. portfolio had performed "extremely well".
MEPC plans to keep the lion's share of its portfolio in the UK, with the remainder in the U.S. and Australia. It has wound down its European portfolio and has no plans to go back into continental Europe in the immediate future.
Tuckey said the group was keen to make acquisitions, with the proceeds of its European disposals, but that there was a shortage of good stock available, particularly in the UK.  
While MEPC has resolved to increase the dividend paid to shareholders, Tuckey said he could not predict when it would be increased although he pointed out that dividend cover had improved to 1.15 times from 1.05 a year before.
"It depends on the forward look, on how the markets are feeling," he said. The market was competitive and good stock was hard to find but Tuckey said he welcomed the prospect of changes to the way the market functioned with more liquidity likely.
"I think there are changes afoot and they are changes for the good because what they will allow is greater liquidity for the sector, possibly through derivatives or the property investment trusts that have been talked about," he said, adding that MEPC would be involved in any such developments.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
It may sound like a dull backwater but the role of compliance has again been thrust into the limelight as yet another respected financial institution was rapped by the authorities this week for breaking the rules.
Compliance officials play a key role in banking and finance, ensuring procedures to safeguard against fraud and malpractice are adhered to from the back office to the board room.
On Thursday British investment watchdog IMRO fined companies in the Robert Fleming group 700,000 pounds ($1.09 million) and Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) secured voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million from a Robert Fleming and Jardine Matheson joint venture.
These punishments stemmed from compliance violations which also saw two individuals banned from the markets.
A compliance officer at a top international investment bank, who did not want to be named, told Reuters the irregular dealing leading to the probe was "as old as the hills".
And it was something the right checks and balances should have avoided. "I'm surprised that something as old as this has cropped up again. It's the sort of thing that any compliance officer worth his salt should have his eye open for," he added.
The joint IMRO and SFC investigation revealed that Colin Armstrong, a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management, had made profits for his own account by the late allocation of deals, thereby depriving client accounts.
Compliance industry insiders said a number of red flags might have warned those in charge that something was amiss far earlier and thereby prevented much of the damage.
Larger-than-life characters and big earners are often left to their own devices and not investigated until too late.
Compliance officers first started appearing in London firms about 10 years ago, but the profile has changed significantly over this period, with many coming from the ranks of accountants and lawyers and seeking a career in the area.
Industry sources say top-ranking individuals can now earn as much as 100,000 pounds a year, including bonuses, which although falling short of what dealers earn, is attracting good people.
For a system of compliance with both internal and external rules and regulations to be wholly effective, the personnel involved not only need to be top notch, they must also have adequate resources and the full backing of senior management.
"The chief executive officer is personally accountable for compliance," the first source said. This means ensuring rules are not breached is not only in the interests of the firm, but also a question of self-preservation for the CEO.
In the Robert Fleming Asset Management (RFAM) probe, RFAM's former chief executive Robert Thomas accepted he "bore ultimate responsibility for the compliance failures...". As a result Thomas had his registration with IMRO ended.
In order to prevent the kind of dealing that Armstrong was engaged in, adequate separation between front and back offices, where the deals are struck and where they are processed, and strict rules on the use of personal accounts are critical.
Market sources noted similarities with Barings, where one of the main criticisms was that Nick Leeson, the trader who stacked up the losses which led to its collapse, was responsible not only for executing trades but settling or matching them as well.
This made it unlikely that any discrepancies in his trading would be uncovered in the back office, the sort of loophole regulators such as IMRO look for when they inspect firms.
Insiders said the Jardine Fleming outcome was a good result for the British watchdog, which came under fire for its handling of previous cases. "If you find a major problem you tell them. If it's a serious problem you tell them immediately, you certainly wouldn't sit on it," said one.
And while the incidence of breaches may appear to be on the rise, it can be argued that the trend shows the net is tightening. But even the best systems will not prevent mistakes.
"Even the best of us make mistakes. If you are a large firm problems do arise, if you find them then you take remedial action. There will always be fools, crooks and incompetents," the first compliance source said.
($1=.6420 Pound)
Members of the Transport and General Workers Union (T&amp;G) at Tradeteam, the distribution arm of the brewing operation of Britain's Bass Plc, are to vote on strike action over proposed pay cuts, the union said on Friday.
The union said in a statement that the ballot of more than 1,000 workers at Tradeteam would start on December 9 and the result would be known on December 20.
Bass said there was no threat to the delivery of drinks to its customers in the run up to the busy Christmas period.
The T&amp;G said the ballot was going ahead after an attempt by Tradeteam, a joint venture between Bass and NFC, to have it halted by a legal injunction failed on Friday.
"Since Bass established Tradeteam in a joint venture with Exel Logistics, management has been trying to cut wages by 100 stg per week and impose inferior working conditions in order to save 10 million stg a year," the union said.
It said Tradeteam had also rejected T&amp;G attempts to establish national bargaining. The T&amp;G said a Liverpool judge had refused to grant an injunction to stop the ballot.
"Bass Brewers Ltd is a very profitable company, which made over 157 million pounds profit over the last year. Their aim at Tradeteam has been to cut the wages of draymen and warehouse workers, many of whom have given over 20 years' loyal service to the company," T&amp;G national secretary for the drinks industry Brian Revell said.
Draymen deliver beer and other drinks to pubs.
"I am pleased that the judge refused the injunction. We are prepared for a long battle with Bass until it honours its responsibilities," he added.
A spokesman for Tradeteam, which is 50.1 percent owned by NFC, denied a trade dispute existed with the union.
"There is no trade dispute with the T&amp;G. Current settlements on pay and conditions between Tradeteam and its staff represented by the T&amp;G have been made with full agreement of the T&amp;G at local branch level," he told Reuters.
"To agree to national wage agreements would mean Tradeteam would be totally out of step with the rest of the industry."
He said the union had been involved throughout the consultation process. This had resulted in the current terms and conditions for staff at each of the local offices at which the T&amp;G was represented, he added.
Bass Brewers said the decision to vote on strike action would not affect beer deliveries over Christmas.
"Obviously the strike issue is one for Tradeteam but we want to reassure customers this will not affect their beer deliveries during or before the Christmas period," Stewart Cain of Bass Brewers told Reuters.
Earlier this week brewer-to-leisure group Bass, the parent company, said it planned to spend 670 million pounds on the business next year, creating some 7,000 jobs.
It said it planned a 300 million pounds investment programme over the next year on its Bass Taverns, converting many pubs to branded concept bars.
Former Barings executive Ron Baker plans to bring a counter-claim in a lawsuit against him by Dutch bank ING Barings for repayment of a loan he is alleged to have received, his lawyer told Reuters on Friday.
"He (Baker) plans to bring in his own counter-claim into those proceedings and they will be heard together unless some sort of arrangement is reached beforehand," Lindsay Hill, a partner at London law firm Fox Williams said.
ING Barings last month confirmed it was suing Baker for 113,000 pounds ($185,800), representing a 100,000 pound loan allegedly given to Baker when he was at Barings, plus interest.
British merchant bank Barings collapsed in February 1995 amid losses of around $1.4 billion run up by the unauthorised derivatives trades of Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson. It was rescued by ING which formed ING Barings as its investment banking arm.
Leeson is currently serving a six-and-a-half year jail sentence in Singapore for his part in the bank's downfall.
But the saga looks set to run on for some time, with writs filed by administrators of the bank against the former auditors and subsequent third party proceedings being issued against former bosses, including Baker.
Hill said Baker would contest the ING Barings case against him and his counter-claim would be for an unpaid bonus.
"He believes that the monies that he was promised by way of bonus remain due and are outstanding so yes, they will come into the equation in terms of resolving the dispute with ING Barings," Hill said.
Baker would not be the first to attempt to force ING Barings to pay a bonus which had apparently been promised before the collapse of Barings itself and ING's takeover.
But Hill said the decision by a London industrial tribunal on Thursday to reject a claim by another former Barings executive for an allegedly unpaid bonus had no implications for Baker's case.
"It's a different case, it's for different sums of money and the circumstances are not the same," Hill said.
Mary Walz, who was global head of equity financial products at Barings Investment Bank, had her 500,000 pound claim, which she said she was told was "set in stone" by her former Barings bosses, thrown out by the tribunal.
Hill declined to say how much Baker's counter-claim would be for but said the sum was "substantial".
The debt restructuring package hammered out between Anglo-French Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel and its creditors may not be able to withstand any extra financial demands resulting from last month's fire, secondary debt trading firm Klesch &amp; Co said on Thursday.
"The recent fire onboard a Eurotunnel HGV shuttle has now raised fundamental safety concerns, with potentially dire (but as yet unquantifiable) long-term implications," Klesch &amp; Co said in a report on the restructuring plans.  
It said from an investment viewpoint the events "call into question the likely adequacy of the financial restructuring package as currently proposed" but acknowledged the immediate impact on Eurotunnel's revenues "is likely to be minor."
The report said that according to its calculations, the multi-billion pound debt restructuring hammered out between Eurotunnel and a group of 225 creditor banks, which was finally agreed in October, had only left the company with "headroom," or contingency reserve, of 600 million pounds ($990.7 million), or around 67 million pounds a year over nine years.  
"Any development (such as the fire) which has the potential to impact future revenues or operating efficiency, could threaten the suffciency of a financial restructuring package."
Passenger car shuttle services resumed through the tunnel on Tuesday, three weeks after the fire closed the undersea link. The fire on a truck destroyed a freight vehicle and damaged a section of the tunnel. Thirty-four people were injured.  
Rail services for passengers between Paris and London and Brussels and London resumed last week but no date has been set for a resumption of the shuttle service for trucks.
The report said that in the aftermath of the fire the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority would have to consider the design and operation of the open-lattice freight carriers.
"Should (it) decide that fundamental changes will be required to the HGV shuttles, the potential for a reduction in revenues and/or increases in costs could reduce the contingency made available by the restructuring," it added.
Klesch &amp; Co also pointed out the fire had highlighted that Eurotunnel "consists in its entirety of a single, high profile, effectively irreplaceable, hugely expensive and vulnerable operating asset," a factor at the core of its concerns.
Following a bumper year in 1996, yet more British companies are likely to be takeover targets in 1997, but much of the merger and acquisition activity will be in the form of agreed deals, corporate financiers say.
"We certainly see the first quarter of next year being very active. There are a lot of transactions in the pipeline, a lot of activity," Rupert Faure Walker, head of corporate finance at HSBC Samuel Montagu, told Reuters.
Britain is still regarded as the European leader for takeover activity. "The markets here have always been more open than elsewhere, with not many constraints to other companies coming over here," another senior corporate financier said.
In the first nine months of 1996, 278 British companies valued at 14.4 billion pounds ($23.99 billion) were sold in cross-border deals, compared to 258 firms worth 19.1 billion pounds in the same period a year earlier.
Faure Walker said most of the deals in the pipeline were agreed rather than contested, with a number of strategic mergers reflecting industry rationalisations and cost eliminations. Others said consolidation and deconsolidation would both be driving forces behind activity in the year ahead.
ELECTION TO SET BUSINESS TEMPO
But while the outlook for the first quarter of the year looks promising for the corporate financiers who earn their fees by advising either acquirer or target, political influences are likely to colour how the market progresses, with the result of the impending general election the major force at work.
"The big thing next year is the election," said Faure Walker, adding that the election of a new goverment was likely to introduce a note of caution into the market.
This view was backed by the second corporate financier who said there could be some slowing of activity ahead of the election as companies did their best to avoid a deal being straddled across an election period.
Britain's opposition Labour party has consistently been ahead of the ruling Conservatives in the opinion polls and an election is due to be called by May.
If Labour wins, companies could take some time to adjust to the new environment and could wait until after a first Labour budget before making any significant moves. For a typical large acquisition this could result a 6-9 month period of caution, some industry players said, although others said activity was likely to continue whatever the government.
TAKEOVERS TO TAKE IN MORE SECTORS
A broader spread of takeovers, evident during 1996, is expected to run into 1997 as companies play "catch-up" after a period of caution following the recession of the early 1990s. Formerly publicly-owned utilities, including the few remaining regional electricity suppliers, will be joined by insurance brokers struggling with declining rates and a host of others.
"The inevitable reconstruction of industries will continue. The pace will quicken," the second corporate financier said.
The tendency towards agreed deals also reflected the fact that Britain's Office of Fair Trading had largely referred contested deals to the department of trade and industry (DTI) in recent months rather than agreed bids, financiers said.
REMAINING RECS SET TO FALL
In the electricity sector, the remaining privatised regional electricity companies (RECs) are viewed as likely targets for U.S. predators. Southern Electric and Yorkshire Electricity are tipped to follow recent takeover targets Northern Electric and London Electricity into U.S. hands.
With only two RECs remaining, some analysts suggest attention will now turn to the water companies, with further takeovers among them.
SMALLER FINANCIAL PLAYERS TO FEEL THE PINCH
The financial services sector is also seen as a hot-bed for further takeovers with perennials such as merchant banks Schroders, Hambros, and Robert Fleming all possible targets for larger global investment banks.
Further consolidation among small, specialist City of London and regional boutiques is also likely and Britain's dwindling club of large mutually-owned building societies could also attract attention from larger groups.
In the insurance sector Commercial Union is seen as a likely bid target or merger partner after widespread rumours suggesting talks with the financial services arm of B.A.T. It has also been linked with General Accident and Guardian Royal Exchange.
Among the insurance brokers, talk of consolidation as firms try to cut costs in the face of declining rates and overcapacity has been fuelled by recent mergers such as Lloyd Thompson and JIB. Willis Corroon and Sedgwick have long been rumoured to be possible merger or takeover candidates.
TELECOMS TO RING IN MORE CHANGES
Corporate financiers see the telecommunications and media sectors as providing significant merger activity during 1997, with Vodafone, cable group Telewest and Orange all tipped as possible targets.
There have also been suggestions that Mercury One-2-One may join Mercury Communications and that British Telecom may buy out its 40 percent partner in Cellnet. Energis, the cable company owned by National Grid, has been valued by some at 600 million pounds, while privately-owned Ionica also has long-term plans to float.
Among media companies, HTV, Yorkshire Tyne Tees and STV have all been suggested as possible targets, with Pearson an outside contender. In the growing sector of publicly quoted football clubs, Manchester United has obvious appeal.
OIL AND GAS TO REMAIN IGNITED
The demerger of British Gas into separate trading and transport firms in February has led to widespread market speculation that an oil major could be interested in buying the trading arm, to be called Centrica.
Worldwide consolidation in the oil industry is seen also affecting British firms. Smaller exploration and production firms might be eyed by the big players, all cash-rich after years of cost-cutting and keen to boost oil and gas reserves.
Other firms tipped to face takeover attempts are DIY retailer Wickes, defence to electronics group Racal, auto-components group T&amp;N, construction group Costain and Imperial Tobacco. Energy, currently part of Hanson but due to be demerged next year, is not expected to be left uncourted for long.
Britain's drink companies are entering a period of steady, organic growth which precludes any major acquisitions. But Allied Domecq, Grand Met and Guinness have been dissuaded from pursuing the idea of demergers.
The major food companies are also looking to prune their brand portfolios to allow a more concentrated marketing push behind core brands with international appeal. This strategy will involve disposal programmes and small bolt-on acquisitions.
Bass and Guinness, Associated British Foods and Tate &amp; Lyle are all sufficiently cash-rich to launch sizeable takeovers.
Britain's Takeover Panel, after battling to defend its policing role of London's busy mergers and acquisitions market against European interference, has ended the year in the spotlight over its handling of CE Electric's bid for Northern Electric.
The non-statutory body has spent much of 1996 campaigning against a framework European Union proposal on takeover bids which it says will lead to multi-million pound lawsuits and harm London's system of takeover regulation.
But on Monday the panel's own role was under scrutiny as the outcome of a bitter bid battle between U.S. group CE and British utility Northern hung in the balance.
"What is going on at the moment is being watched pretty closely. It is a fairly unique situation," a financial services lawyer said.
Criticism of the part the panel has played stems from a 250,000 pound ($418,600) payment made by Northern to one of its advisors, BZW, the investment banking arm of British banking giant Barclays Plc.
BZW said this was a discretionary fee and denied that it was linked to its purchase last week of Northern shares, which had already been allowed by the panel. After it was told of the payment, the panel extended the deadline for acceptances.
After the official close of the offer last Friday, Northern would have remained independent as CE had only achieved the support of 49.77 percent of Northern shareholders. But following the extension, CE said on Monday it had 50.13 percent.
A source close to the discussions said it was "very unusual and maybe unique" for the panel to be in the position of deciding the fate of a company in this way.
This view was echoed by other market participants.
"This is an unndented step the panel has taken," one investment banking source told Reuters of the decision to grant an extension to the offer period at such a late stage.
Northern's fate now lies in the panel's hands. The company has said it wants to appeal against the decision and revert to the result at the original end of the offer period. Acceptances after the initial deadline require the panel's approval.
"They (the panel) now find themselves in a very difficult situation," the investment banking source added.
Any changes in the way in which the panel operates must either come from government, by bringing in legislation to establish a statutory force to regulate takeovers, or from within the body itself, market players said.
Pressure from industry participants could lead to the panel making changes itself. "They can change the "Blue Book" (the rule book regulating takeovers) at the drop of a hat," one industry source said, adding that it had so far managed the system well.
"The panel seemed to be coping well with the upturn in bid activity. The system seemed to be working pretty well," he said. Mergers and acquisitions activity has reached peak levels in recent weeks, with a number of both agreed and disputed bids.
Apart from the potential threat from the European takeover directive, there had "been no major challenges to the panel's authority over the year", he added.
Even if the ruling Conservative Party loses a general election which must be held by next May, market participants said they did not expect pressure for legislation to put the panel on a statutory footing under a Labour government.
"The general feeling is pretty much against it (legislation) and the indications so far ist change it," said one.
CE Electric, the U.S. energy group, appeared poised to win its hostile bid for British regional electricity group Northern Electric Plc on Tuesday after Britain's Takeover Panel ruled against the target firm.
Late on Monday night the British company lost an appeal to the panel, which polices London's mergers and acquisitions market, to reverse an extension of the offer period for CE's 782 million pound ($1.3 billion) bid to 1300 GMT on Tuesday.
On Monday morning CE, which is controlled by CalEnergy Co Inc, said it had received acceptances totalling just over the 50 percent mark needed for victory. The offer was meant to close last Friday but was extended after an appeal by CE.
This extension was granted because CE raised concerns about the purchase of Northern Electric shares last week by its advisers British merchant bank Schroders and BZW, the investment banking arm of Barclays, and a discretionary payment of 250,000 pounds to BZW but not declared until Friday.
In its statement the panel said it had only been informed of the payment early on Friday but that while "neither element of the fee arrangement was dependent upon the success or failure of the offer", it was "material information which ought to have been made known to the executive" earlier in the week.
Northern in turn launched its own appeal against the extension of the deadline because at the time of the first deadline, CE had only gathered support totalling 49.77 percent and therefore fell short of the total needed to win.
But after a day of uncertainty on Monday, the panel said its appeal committee had "unanimously dismissed" Northern's appeal, that the latest time for acceptance of CE's offer should be extended and "any valid acceptances and withdrawals received by the latter time should be taken into account".
The panel also said the non-disclosure "may have had market consequences affecting the outcome of the bid, bearing in mind the narrow margin between success and failure in this case".
CE officials were not immediately available for comment but Northern, which has fought off CE's approach from the beginning claiming it undervalued the company, refused to throw in the towel and urged shareholders who had indicated they would accept CE's 650 pence per share offer to think again.
"It is now up to the market to decide. If shareholders do not wish this bid to succeed they should deliver withdrawals of acceptances to the Royal Bank of Scotland by 1300 on Tuesday," a spokesman for Northern Electric told Reuters after the ruling.
The spokesman said that in the event of the CE bid lapsing, Northern was willing to "attempt to reach agreement with CE Electric or any other bidder on the true value of the company".
By agreeing to effectively "collapse" a rule which says a bidder cannot come back and bid for the same company within a 12 month-period, the spokesman said Northern was opening the way for shareholders to withdraw their acceptances and reopen the debate about the value of the company.
BZW, which as a result of not declaring the discretionary fee from Northern at the appropriate time will not now be paid this part, said it had done nothing wrong.
"BZW has at all times acted in good faith and has risked its own capital in support of Northern's defence. Our fee arrangement was in no way contingent upon the purchase of Northern shares and the panel has permitted this purchase to stand," a spokesman for the firm told Reuters.
This is not the first time such uncertainty has surrounded Northern's future since it was privatised along with its 11 regional electricity company (REC) peers in 1990.
In 1994 it was the first of the cash-rich RECs to face a takeover and successfully fought off -- partly with the help of an extraordinary 560 million pound defence package -- a bid by conglomerate Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner ASA.
If CE's bid goes through only two of the original RECs will remain independent, Yorkshire Electricity and Southern Electric.  
"It is now up to the market," Northern said, calling for shareholders to withdraw their shares from CE's offer by 1300 GMT on Tuesday, the deadline for the hostile bid.
"In the event that this bid lapses, the board is willing...to enter into discussions with CE Electric, or any other party, with a view to reaching agreement on an improved offer for Northern Electric," the utility said in a statement.
On Monday morning, CE said it had received acceptances totalling just over the 50 percent needed for victory.
CE's offer had been due to end on Friday, when it had only gathered support totalling 49.77 percent of the total. However, the Takeover Panel extended the deadline after CE appealed, questioning the purchase of Northern Electric shares by its advisers, Schroders and BZW, and a discretionary payment of 250,000 pounds to BZW.
($1=.5973 Pound)
Increased confidence means a third of British companies expect to raise property holdings over the next six months, according to a survey by the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and property consultants Grimley.
"Business confidence has strengthened markedly compared with six months ago and companies expect a further pick-up in business, led by domestic demand," said Sudhir Junankar, associate director of economic analysis at the CBI.
"With profitability set to grow faster over the next six months, the upturn in the commercial property market is becoming more firmly based," he added.
The six-monthly survey, which canvassed 645 private sector firms across the range of sectors and regions in Britain, found 32 percent of companies expect to increase property holdings, 26 percent see a reduction and 41 percent do not envisage a change.
"We expect a steady improvement rather than a dramatic surge in property requirements. The net balance on this survey is plus six percent over the next six months," Stuart Morley, Grimley's head of research, said at a briefing on the survey. This, he said was the highest result of the five surveys so far.
The report singled out the distribution, metal manufacturing and chemical processing, transport and communications sectors as those likely to see the largest increases in property holdings while over the last six months the largest increases have been in the retail sector.
Larger companies are most likely to increase their property holdings, reversing a declining trend over the last six months. This, said Morley, could mark the end of the large-scale restructurings which such companies have been undergoing.
"Large companies have gone through a period of restructuring. This suggests that period has come to an end. They are now looking to expand their holdings," he said.
Morley said companies were also "noticeably more optimistic about employment prospects than they were in previous surveys", adding this was "now feeding through into increased property demand", and rents were rising fastest in the retail sector.
Retail was most active in terms of change of holdings and the survey said this should continue. "Not only did this sector see the largest net increase in property holdings over the past six months, it is also expecting the largest net increase."
Areas where growth in demand for property is expected to be greatest are the north west of the country, followed by Northern Ireland, Greater London and Scotland while holdings are expected to fall at a greater rate in the south east,
Town centres, with government encouragement, have become more attractive with 50 percent of the extra retail space in these areas rather than out-of-town.
"This shows a gradual realisation that government policies are beginning to bite, a gradual realisation of the encouragement towards town centres where more companies will be looking for space," Morley said.
Demand for office space is particularly strong in town centres, although the largest companies are still seeking out-of-town floorspace.
According to the survey the main reason for companies to spend capital on property over the next six months "is the need to expand capacity" ahead of spending to replace property or to increase efficiency.
The main constraints companies see to capital expenditure on property are inadequate net returns, difficulty in disposing of property and a shortage of suitable property, the survey found.
Hunting so-called "fat cats" - the biggest company boardroom earners - may have become a British media obsession but the pay packets of the country's top players are under even closer scrutiny from institutional shareholders.
The latest row, between electronics giant General Electric Co and some of its major shareholders who objected to a 10 million pound ($15.61 million) five-year package for new managing director George Simpson, resulted in GEC setting tougher performance targets.
But questions remain over how much the individuals charged with running some of Britain's most, and in some cases least, successful companies deserve to be paid and have led to a reappraisal of the fundamentals of corporate governance.
Both last year's Greenbury committee on executive pay and the earlier Cadbury report on corporate governance laid down guidelines on how companies should behave. But not all the rules are compulsory and some firms have opted not to toe the line.
This has led to a more active approach by leading institutional shareholders like Norwich Union and has seen greater involvement from bodies such as the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension funds.
"Institutional shareholders are paying a lot more attention to these issues, not perhaps out of choice but because of circumstances. We do think remuneration issues are important but perhaps get more publicity than they should," Anita Skipper, corporate governance manager at Norwich Union told Reuters.
Skipper said the group, which has been looking at corporate governance issues for more than a decade, does not generally give a view on the general package an executive receives, but tries to ensure a company's performance justifies the benefit.
This means close scrutiny of every aspect of the company's performance, including factors such as its return on capital, cashflow, the way it is managed and its prospects.
"It's good to see the big investing institutions flexing their muscles and taking an active interest in this way," one industry insider told Reuters.
Last week Tim Melville-Ross, director general of the Institute of Directors, rallied behind Simpson, arguing that very few people were capable of doing the job.
Melville-Ross also sat on the Greenbury panel which urged the remuneration committees - which decide directors' salaries - to take into account the wider scene, including pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the company and industry.
A row over a new executive bonus scheme at British power and water giant United Utilities in July fuelled public outrage at the million-pound packages that executive directors of monopoly utilities have managed to amass since privatisation.
Last year, chairman of Marks and Spencer Sir Richard Greenbury was given the job of attempting to impose curbs following public outrage over the pay of Cedric Brown, formerly the chief executive of British Gas.
"That was a watershed. That was what raised public awareness of the issue (of directors' pay)," Norwich Union's Skipper said.
The Greenbury committee said a number of privatised water and energy companies "have developed, perhaps unintentionally, remuneration packages which are richer than required to recruit, retain and motivate quality managers".
Skipper maintains that revealing directors' pay is a requirement of good corporate governance. "It should be there for shareholder scrutiny," she said.
But her view is not appreciated by all directors. One director of a quoted financial institution, recently told Reuters he was firmly against having his salary and pension details published not least because of the potential personal repurcussions.
His mother-in-law happens to be a shareholder and receives the company's annual report and accounts and he confided that she has since hinted she will re-write her will in favour of her other children.
($1=.6406 Pound)
After several shaky starts, Britain's commercial property market looks set to build on some improvement during 1996, but property experts stress there will not be a return to the sort of boom seen during the 1980s.
"This is the "Real Thing'. That is the growing opinion among investors when they consider the recovery now underway in the UK real estate market," said David Hutchings of property consultants Healey &amp; Baker in his 1997 outlook.
Hutchings predicts real rental growth of three percent in 1997 and possible total returns of 15-17 percent for institutional quality portfolios. This should outstrip the return on gilts and may surpass equity returns too, he adds.
But uncertainty ahead of a general election, which must be held by the end of May, means a "gradual but sustained upturn" is more likely than a market boom, he said.
Improved signs of demand, particularly for office space in central London and retail developments, especially shopping centres, have raised expectations. "The feeling is generally that this year is going to be a good one," a senior property analyst at another leading firm of advisors told Reuters.
This view is supported by a recent survey by the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and property consultants Grimley which was also cautiously bullish. It found increased business confidence meant a third of British firms expect to raise property holdings over the next six months.
The six-monthly survey, which canvassed 645 private sector firms across the range of sectors and regions in Britain, found 32 percent of companies expect to increase property holdings, 26 percent see a reduction and 41 envisage no change.
NO DRAMATIC SURGE IN DEMAND
"We expect a steady improvement rather than a dramatic surge in property requirements. The net balance on this survey is plus six percent over the next six months," Stuart Morley, Grimley's head of research, said last week.
Sudhir Junankar of the CBI said firms expect a further pick-up in business, led by domestic demand. "With profitability set to grow faster over the next six months, the upturn in the commercial property market is becoming more firmly based."
The CBI/Grimley survey predicts such growth will be strongest in the northwest of England, followed by Northern Ireland, Greater London and Scotland.
Larger companies are expected to lead the charge with those involved in distribution, transport and communications citing expanding capacity as the main spur in giving the go-ahead to capital expenditure on property.
The survey found smaller firms, as well as those involved in metal manufacturing, chemical processing, finance and business services, said that increasing efficiency was the main factor influencing plans for investment in property.
INTERESTED INVESTORS
But companies seeking additional or new space are not the only ones likely to fuel demand for real estate during 1997. Hutchings said the recovery underway in the property market is supported by both occupational and investment demand, in contrast to a brief upsurge during 1993.
Property consultant Knight Frank predicts that prime investment yields will be little changed in December from their levels in December 1996.
It forecasts the yield on City of London offices will be unchanged at 5.5 percent, while yields on offices in the area around London's M25 motorway and provincial towns will rise from 6.25 percent to 6.5 percent and from 6.5 percent to 7.0 percent respectively. In addition to offices, investors and property companies are particularly keen on shopping centres. "The prospects for the retail sector are good," the second analyst said.
Hutchings also forsees higher rents during the year ahead, fuelled by a growing economy, a shortage of top quality supply and low interest rates. Although some occupiers will hang back until after the election, occupational demand means rents will rise "at least until new development comes forward".
Some development has already begun and Hutchings says there are now growing signs "that institutional funds will re-enter the speculative development market in 1997" although bank lending for such schemes remains tight.
This is not the case for other projects where bank loans are more readily available and competition to lend for quality developments has led to wafer-thin margins being charged by some banks, particularly German lenders.
LONDON LEADS THE WAY
While the number of cranes over the City of London -- London's traditional financial heartland -- has not mushroomed, development activity has begun to pick up and more can be expected over the next 12 months, market players said.
In London one very visible factor is the heated rivalry that has emerged between the City and Docklands, the former docks area to the east of the capital which is home to the Canary Wharf tower, London's tallest building.
Firms such as U.S. investment bank Merrill Lynch and Britain's Robert Fleming have still to decide on where to relocate, with others such as Close Brothers and Cazenove also rumoured to be in the hunt.
And in the retail sector, last year's sale of former fashion mecca Carnaby Street by Dutch property fund Wereldehave for 90 million pounds "is a testament to the strength of investors' faith in the London market", said Hutchings.
Even if British media and leisure group Pearson decides to sell its interest in merchant banking group Lazards, the bank would not be under immediate threat from larger rivals, banking sources said on Monday.
Marjorie Scardino's accession last week as Pearson chief executive has prompted widespread talk that Pearson would sell its 50 percent in Lazard Partners, which owns the three Lazard houses in London, Paris and New York.
But a pre-emption agreement in cross-shareholdings between Lazards and Pearson would ensure the partnership has first refusal on its own shares if Pearson decides to sell its stake, thus preventing the family-run merchant bank from falling into the hands of larger and expanding international rivals.
"This (speculation) is prompted by the fact that Pearson has a new chief executive who will obviously want to review things," one senior corporate financier told Reuters, adding that the pre-emption agreement meant Lazards "either stays with Pearson or comes within the Lazard empire fully".
Officials at both Pearson and Lazard Brothers in London declined to comment on talk of a possible sale.
Pearson has a 50 percent stake in London's Lazard Brothers and smaller nine percent stakes in Lazard Freres in Paris and New York. Its 50 percent stake in the umbrella group Lazard Partners was negotiated during the 1980s.
Analysts suggest Lazards does not fit into Pearson's main information, education and entertainment divisions and is therefore a target for being spun off. But banking sources point out that Lazards has been a profitable venture and not a drain.
"It (Lazards) has not required any capital or management time (from Pearson)," the senior financier added.
Pearson, in its 1995 annual report and accounts, points out that its "close ties to the three Lazard investment banking houses again proved their worth in 1995".
It highlighted attributable profits of 39.9 million pounds from the group for that year. If Pearson, described by Michel David-Weill -- senior partner of Lazard Freres in Paris -- as a "great partner" to Lazards since 1919, decides to sever its ties with the merchant bank, there could also be other complications.
The Lazard group, which has successfully specialised in corporate finance advisory work as well as asset mangagment and trading activities, holds 48 million Pearson shares.
The Financial Times at the weekend quoted David-Weill as saying Lazards might decide to sell this 360 million pound ($600 million) stake to finance a buy-back of Pearson's holding.
The newspaper said David-Weill had said the Lazards holding in Pearson was equivalent in value to Pearson's Lazard stake.
Although Lazards's stake has been seen as obstacle to a takeover attempt against Pearson, it might sell its shares on the market but in discussion with the group and "not to a party which could be hostile", David-Weill told the paper.
While Scardino's role at Pearson has been the subject of close scrutiny since her appointment, Lazards have also been in the news, with suggestions of a power-struggle over who will succeed 64-year-old David-Weill.
David-Weill said last week there was no succession crisis at the bank, adding he still had time. Under the bank's statutes, he can remain at the helm for another eight years. ($1=.5974 Pound)
European privatisations in 1997 could total a record $53 billion, with the telecommunications and utilities sectors expected to dominate activity, U.S. investment bank J.P. Morgan said in a report on Monday.
"Compared with last year, we expect a significantly higher number of IPOs (Initial Public Offerings)...Italy stands out as having the most ambitious (privatisation) programme, at close to $20 billion," said Caroline Meroz, one the survey's authors.
The report said in the run up to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), European governments "may feel under increasing pressure to accelerate...privatisation programmes to place themselves on track to meet the Maastricht three percent deficit criterion".
Proceeds could be used to reduce government's financial debt, although they cannot be taken into account when calculating the deficit.
It said proceeds of European privatisations in 1996 totalled a record $43 billion, a 30 percent increase on the previous high in 1994, bringing the total value of the European privatisation programme so far to $230 billion.
And the total estimate for the proceeds of privatisations through to the end of the century could total $118 billion, according to the report, which was based on 53 enterprises which governments have confirmed they plan to privatise.
Meroz told Reuters that the utility sector had shown the greatest slippage on scheduled privatisations for 1996 with a completion rate of only 20 percent, but that otherwise it had been "a pretty good year".
This had been fuelled by strong European equity markets which, excluding Britain, rose by 26 percent over the year and also by "the variety of small innovative deals such as share buy-backs," Meroz said.
Such buy-backs could, Meroz said, be used by governments to dispose of residual holdings in companies during 1997.
The report said the energy sector accounted for a larger than expected portion of offerings while the privatisations of Deutsche Telekom and Italy's ENI "together accounted for 25 percent of 1996 proceeds".
Demand for future offerings should be well suppored by growing domestic interest and J.P. Morgan forecasts that foreign tranches will be closer to 40 percent than the 50 percent take-up by foreign investors expected in the past.
"The market has been able to absorb a lot of equities. We think the demand is there," Meroz said, adding there would be strong retail as well as institutional demand.
Some of the major privatisations planned for 1996 which failed to see the light of day were included in the report's 1997 estimates but the rest "may be cancelled (or possibly postponed to much later years) or may be carried out through alternative methods, such as private sales".
But a lack of mix of new ideas, both in terms of sectors and the countries the privatisations hail from, could have a dampening effect on the market in 1997, with privatised stocks seldom able to offer the upside of consumer recovery.
British yachtsman Tony Bullimore's survival for four days in the icy Southern Ocean owes much to the high-tech safety equipment available to the modern sailor.
This year's London International Boat Show was crammed with gadgets such as the Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacon (EPIRB). It costs 700 pounds ($1,176) but proved its worth by showing Bullimore's Australian rescuers where to look for him.
Bullimore's ordeal in the upturned hull of his yacht after it capsized in a solo round-the-world race is a far cry from the "Mediterranean marina" which was the centrepiece of this year's boat show at Earl's Court in west London.
Huge "Gin Palaces" abound but the show's organisers were keen to stress "messing about in boats" is not only for the rich.
The smallest vessel on show, the aptly-named Tadpole, was six foot (two metres) long and costs 297 pounds.
Around 800 boats were on display, 20 of them bobbing gently up and down in a giant indoor marina, built specially for the show, an annual event.
The 200,000 visitors had to wear slippers over their shoes to protect the polished decks if they wanted to go on board.
The British boating sector has a turnover of some two billion pounds and the boats on show were not just for dreaming about. Orders totalling millions of pounds were placed in the first week of the show, which ended on Sunday.
TRADITIONAL VERSUS HIGH-TECH EQUIPMENT
The halls were full of the paraphernalia of boating, with stands displaying traditional brass clocks and barometers competing with the latest in high-tech satellite navigation equipment.
If the latest in pump-action lavatories, the smoothest automatic winches or a machine that turns sea-water into drinking water is what you are after, this was the place to be.
Some firms demonstrated state-of-the-art sail materials, whose development owes much to the space programme. Others showed how traditional wooden "clinker" boat-building still has a place in the late 20th century.
The sunnier side of pleasure cruising was to the fore, but, topically, there were also tales of disaster and endeavour.
Among the speakers were a couple who 23 years ago spent four months drifting in the Pacific in a tiny inflatable life-raft.
Motor boats such as the sleek Sunseekers, the latest model of which, the Predator, sells for 1.8 million pounds, dominate one area, but most of the floorspace was dedicated to sailing.
SAILING REFLECTS BRITISH APPROACH TO THE SEA
This, says Tony Beechey, executive chairman of the British Marine Industries Federation, is in keeping with the British approach to the sea and reflects recent Olympic successes.
"Britons have always been more sail-oriented than power, maybe it is something to do with the climate...but we seem to have a stronger sailboat past," he told Reuters.
John Merricks, who with Ian Walker won a silver medal at the Atlanta Olympics in the 470 dinghy class, says boats need to keep evolving if sailing is to compete with other sports, even if this means his class is dropped after the 2000 games.
"It's harder to draw people into the sport with new outdoor activities competing against it," he said. "We need new, fast, exciting and colourful classes."
Many visitors made a beeline for the 49-er, recently selected as a new Olympic class and one of a new breed of "skiffs" --lightning-quick sailing dinghies which appear to fly across the water with both helmsman and crew suspended from trapezes.
They may cost just over 10,000 pounds, but Martin Wadhams of LDC Racing Sailboats which produces the space-age looking dinghy says fitness, skill and the agility of crews are what counts.
"The major thing about the boat is it brings the true spirit of the Olympics. It is going to spawn a new era in sailing." ($1=.5950 Pound)
