Global media group News Corp Ltd told analysts in a telephone briefing on Thursday that it still expected 20 percent profit growth for the 1996/97 year, despite a below-expectations first half profit result, analysts said.
"They did say that they're still on track for the 20 percent growth," one senior Sydney media analyst said after the morning teleconference briefing between company officials and U.S. and Australian analysts.  
Another senior media analyst, who also asked not to be named, said News had repeated its August 1996 forecast of 20 percent profit growth in the teleconference.
"Yes. They've got no worries about reaching that one," the analyst said.
Earlier on Thursday, News Corp posted a A$731 million net profit before abnormals for the six months to December 31, up 10.3 percent on the same period a year earlier.
But this was below analysts expectations of a pre-abnormals net profit for the half of A$735 million to A$775 million.
Solid growth in the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's (CBA) home loan portfolio has brightened its profit outlook slightly and should underpin its half year result due for release on Wednesday, analysts said.
The bank is expected to report a profit rise of about one percent for the six months to December 31.
CBA itself has been warning since early 1996 that margin pressure would ensure flat profits for the year to June 30.
But some analysts said CBA has been privately more bullish in recent months.
"It's been outlined by the bank that trading conditions have been reasonable and may be slightly better than expected, given the price war last year," said one Sydney banking analyst.
"Given some of the statements coming out of the banks, if the result's not going to be flat then it's going to be higher rather than lower," said ABN AMRO banking analyst Michael Pulman.
Analysts are forecasting a net profit before abnormals for the six months of between A$535 million and A$560 million compared with A$541.9 million in the first half o 1995/96, but below the second half's A$577 million.
"I think you'll see a lot of volume in housing coming through which will be enough to maintain their net interest revenue," said the Sydney analyst.
Reserve Bank of Australia figures show CBA's home loan portfolio grew 10.3 percent to A$28.8 billion in the year to November, while home lending growth by all banks rose just 7.5 percent.
The CBA's share of home lending by banks, which does not include lending by the burgeoning non-bank mortgage originators, rose to 22.3 percent from 21.7 percent during the year.
"They do have a strong focus on the need to keep their share of housing and they've kept their share rolling along better than some of the other banks," said Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney.
Analysts also said CBA's bad debts and provisioning were unlikely to drag profits any lower than in previous years.
"Provisioning will be fairly benign. We think that provisioning is at a trough and will stay in it for a few more results, particularly for CBA which is loaded up with housing more than some other banks," said Macquarie's Maloney.
Market attention is likely to focus on just how much CBA's pre-emptive cut in its key variable mortgage rate last year, which effectively forced a 75 basis point cut in big-bank home loan margins, has cut its overall margin.
CBA's group interest margin fell to 4.1 percent from 4.3 percent in the 1995/96 year, but this was before the home loan rate cuts of late 1996. CBA's containment of costs and what has happened to its cost to income ratio will also be of interest.
Analysts said CBA appeared to have kept costs down well, although it was unlikely to have made big inroads into staff and branch numbers.
Analysts expect CBA to declare a dividend of about 42 cents to 44 cents, up from the 38 cent interim dividend set in the first half of 1995/96.
CBA shares closed 15 cents up at a record A$13.50 on Friday.
There has been talk for some time that the bank has plans for a special dividend.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Australia's largest home mortgage lender, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), announced a surprisingly strong 11 percent surge in first half 1996/97 profits on Wednesday, despite erosion of its interest margins.
CBA said good cost control and a 33 percent surge in business lending more than offset a further squeeze in home loan margins.
"Business volumes during the first half of 1996/97 were pleasing, leading to a better than expected interim result," CBA managing director David Murray told a news conference.
"This is likely to lead to a slightly better than expected full-year result," Murray said.
CBA's net profit for the six months to December 31 rose to A$602 million (US$455 million) from A$542 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
CBA had itself been saying until now that it expected hot competition in its key home loan market would squeeze margins and keep profits flat in the year to June 30, 1997.
Analysts too had expected a subdued profit performance, forecasting a profit of between A$535 million and A$560 million.
CBA's shares rallied sharply on the profit and on news of a interim dividend of 45 cents per share, up seven cents on the previous interim dividend.
CBA's shares closed up 50.1 cents at A$13.91, having climbed in afternoon trade to a record high of A$14.00. CBA's surge led the All Ordinaries index overall to a record closing high of 2,473.5, up 25.4 points.
"Obviously the market liked it. The profit was probably about A$50 million above expectations and there was a nice increase in the dividend," said Lance Jones dealer Hamish Dee.
Analysts later said they would increase their forecasts for CBA's full-year profit by about A$50 million to A$1.15 billion.
But CBA dampened optimism about its business lending boom on Wednesday by cutting its key varible home mortgage rate to 7.55 percent from 8.25 percent, ensuring further margin pressure.
CBA's group net interest margin fell to 3.71 percent in the first half from 4.12 percent in the first half of 1995/96 and Murray said the latest cut would further erode margins.
This is CBA's second unilateral home loan interest rate cut in less than a year. The bank cut its key variable home loan rate to 9.9 percent from 10.5 percent in May.
That cut triggered a round of mortgage rate cuts by the other major banks and was generally seen as the catalyst to a 50 to 75 basis point cut in big bank home loan margins.
But CBA's pre-emptive strike was also popular with home lenders, who increased their lending from the bank by 14 percent in the half.
Murray said the latest home loan cuts had more to do with increasingly aggressive competition in the home loan market than with any pre-emption of another cut in official cash rates.
Non bank lenders like Aussie Home Loans have snared about 10 percent of the home loan market in the last three years with cheap loans funded by securitised bond issues.
CBA also said its efforts to control costs and increase productivity were a factor in the better than expected profit.
Meanwhile, CBA confirmed that it was looking closely at securitising some of its mortgage portfolio and that it was not looking at issuing a special dividend, contrary to speculation.
(A$1=US$0.75)
Analysts said on Wednesday they would increase their forecasts for the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's (CBA) year net profit by about A$50 million to A$1.15 billion after a surprisingly strong first half result.
CBA posted a net profit for the six months to December 31 of A$602 million, up 11 percent from A$542 million in the previous comparable half and well above analysts' expectations of A$535 million to A$560 million.
But analysts said the CBA's announcement of another round of unprompted mortgage rate cuts had dampened their enthusiasm.  
"I'll have to push my numbers up a bit. It just depends on the effect of that rate cut today," said Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney said.
CBA announced that it would cut its main variable mortgage rate to 7.55 percent from 8.25 percent and would cut its 'no frills' Economiser variable rate to 6.95 percent from 7.35 percent from March 27 for existing customers and February 13 for new customers.  
The rate cut is seen ebbing further away at CBA's margins because of CBA managing director David Murray's comments that the cut was for competitive reasons, not in advance of another cut in official cash rates.
ABN AMRO banking analyst Michael Pulman said he had increased his forecast for CBA's full year net profit post goodwill to about A$1.158 billion from about A$1.1 billion before the result.
Pulman said the new rate cut would further cut margins, but that it may not be as much as in the past.  
Analysts said the increasing size of the CBA's commercial lending portfolio and its overseas portfolio meant the rate cut would have a proportionally lower effect.
The competitive benefits and the resultingly stronger lending growth also dampened the effect of the cut on margins, they said.
"It's not huge at the end of the line," said Pulman.
"They said last year that for every 10 basis point cut in the fully variable rate, you can cut A$12 million from the profit immediately and A$5 million over time," he said.
"I think it will be less than that this time."  
CBA's commercial lending approvals rose 33 percent in the first half and new equipment finance rose 30 percent.
CBA said the launch of its Business Asset Finance and Capital Business Card products in July and October 1996 had attracted significant new business.
Housing loans rose 14 percent to A$36.63 billion in the first half and the CBA's share of total new home loan approvals continued to run ahead of its share of the total existing home loans.  
BNP Equities analyst Linda Lyon said she wouldn't be surprised if CBA's second half profit was actually lower than in the first half.
"There's this continual slicing into the margins," Lyon said. "I would be looking at a flat second half," she said.
Share traders however were much more ebullient, shunting CBA stock to a new all time high of A$14.00 in late afternoon trade, before it eased back to close 50.1 cents higher at A$13.911.
CBA's surge led the All Ordinaries index overall to a record closing high of 2,473.5, up 25.4 points.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
The Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) announced a surprisingly strong 11 percent rise in first half profits on Wednesday as a 33 percent surge in business lending more than offset a further squeeze in home loan margins.
"Business volumes during the first half of 1996/97 were pleasing, leading to a better than expected interim result," CBA managing director David Murray told a news conference.
"This likely to lead to a slightly better than expected full year result," Murray said.  
CBA's net profit for the six months to December 31 rose to A$602 million from A$542 million in the comparable six months a year earlier.
CBA had itself been saying until now that it expected competition in its key home loan market would squeeze home loan margins and keep profits flat in the year to June 30, 1997.
Analysts too had expected a subdued profit performance, forecasting a profit of between A$535 million and A$560 million.
CBA's shares rallied sharply on the profit and on news of a interim dividend of 45 cents per share, up seven cents on the previous interim dividend.  
CBA's shares were up 47 cents at A$13.88 at 3.50 p.m. (0450 GMT), helping to drive the share market overall to a new record high. "Obviously the market liked it. The profit was probably about A$50 million above expectations and there was a nice increase in the dividend," said Lance Jones dealer Hamish Dee.
CBA said the launch of its Business Asset Finance and Capital Business Card products in July and October 1996 had attracted significant new business.  
But CBA dampened optimism about its business lending boom by cutting its varible home mortgage rates by up to 0.7 of a percentage point, ensuring further margin pressure on Australia's largest home lender.
"It will narrow the margins further," Murray said.
CBA's group net interest margin fell to 3.71 percent in the first half of 1996/96, compared with 4.12 percent and 4.10 percent respectively in the first and second halves of 1995/96.
This is CBA's second unilateral home loan interest rate cut in less than a year. The bank cut its key variable home loan rate to 9.9 percent from 10.5 percent in May.  
That cut triggered a round of mortgage rate cuts by the other major banks and was generally seen as the catalyst to a 50 to 75 basis point cut in big bank home loan margins.
It cut its key variable rate to 7.55 percent on Wednesday.
Murray was reluctant to predict that the CBA would sustain the 11 percent profit rise through the full year because of the expected margin squeeze, saying only that 1996/97 was likely to be a little better than the previously expected flat result.
He said the latest home loan cuts had more to do with increasingly aggressive competition in the home loan market than with any pre-emption of another cut in official cash rates.  
"It's true that this move has got more to do with the structure of home loan interest rates in Australia than it has to do with our view about monetary policy," he said.
CBA also said its efforts to control costs and increase productivity were a factor in the the better than expected profit. CBA's cost to income ratio fell to 60.3 percent from 60.9 percent and would have been 59.5 percent if not for CBA's buy-back of 10 percent of its shares from the government.
Meanwhile the CBA confirmed that it was looking closely at securitising some of its mortgage portfolio and that it was not looking at issuing a special dividend.
Newspaper, magazine and radio group Rural Press Ltd said on Thursday that it was not confident of the economic turnaround needed to increase its profit for the full year to June 30, 1997.
"My personal view is that we're some time away from some significant turnaround ... in the consumer markets and in real estate," managing director Brian McCarthy told Reuters.
"I can't see much improvement up to the middle of the year at the earliest," McCarthy said in an Interview.  
Earlier Rural Press announced a four percent rise in net profit for the six months to December to A$16.96 million and set an unchanged dividend of four cents per share.
But Rural Press also warned that trading in the first five weeks of the second half had been below last year and that it needed an improvement in the economy to continue its history of profit rises for the full year.
McCarthy said earnings before interest and tax would have fallen marginally in the half year if they had been compared on a like-for-like basis before the effects of acquisitions.  
McCarthy said the slight profit fall on a like-for-like basis was a reflection of weak real estate and retail sectors, which provide the bulk of Rural Press' advertising income.
"The retailing industry is very flat to the point of depressed. There's not a lot of activity in the real estate sectors and they are our key sources of revenue," he said.
"We think we're doing all of the things that have to be done internally, but it's a very hard external environment that we're looking at today," he added. "In the framework in which we operate, we don't see it as a disappointing result."  
McCarthy said that given the tough economic outlook, there was not going to a major second half recovery in Rural Press' revenues.
He said it was unlikely that Rural Press' final dividend would fall.
However Rural Press, despite the operational pressure, remained keen to acquire new businesses, McCarthy said.
"We're still very, very keen to keep growing and acquiring," he said, adding that Rural Press had facilities in place to allow acquisitions worth up to A$50 million.  
Rural Press' share price closed unchanged at A$4.10, despite the market's one percent rise overall to a record high.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) managing director David Murray, buoyant after a surprisingly strong profit result, said on Thursday that CBA had decided to expand its presence in Asia and New Zealand.
Murray also said CBA had submitted a first-round non-binding bid to buy Axiom Funds Mangement, which manages A$17 billion of funds and is being sold by the New South Wales state government.  
"We've already expanded our presence in Asia and we're about to start our joint venture bank in Indonesia, but I think there's more up there for us to do and we've decided to seek out some fresh opportunities," Murray told reporters after addressing a Securities Institute function.
"Our focus has been Indonesia, China, Vietnam and India because they are countries whose financial systems are still evolving because the Australian system, which is one we know very well, is quite mature," he said.  
"We're looking in each of those countries for joint venture opportunities," he said, adding such joint venture arrangements would not require significant capital injections from CBA.
CBA announced an 11 percent rise in net profit for the six months to December 31 to A$602 million and increased its interim dividend by seven cents to 45 cents per share.
The result was well above expectations and fired a four percent rally in CBA's share price to A$13.90. The stock closed up two cents at A$13.93 on Thursday as the overall market rallied another one percent to an all-time high.  
Murray said CBA was looking to diversify and expand in New Zealand as well as Asia, and was examining acquisition opportunities and the potential for organic growth of its ASB Bank unit there.
He said CBA had been successful in New Zealand with ASB Bank, but that it still had only a relatively small presence.
"So if we had any opportunities to expand any further, we'd like to take them, because we know the market and we think we could provide a pretty good service there," he said.  
Murray agreed that the only large bank in New Zealand not already owned by CBA or its Australian competitors was the National Bank of New Zealand Ltd, which is owned by Lloyds TSB Group Plc.
Murray said CBA had enough capital on hand to handle routine expansion and therefore would continue with its current high dividend payout ratio. CBA would go back to shareholders either to adjust its dividend payout ratio or to raise capital through a share issue if it wanted to make a larger than routine acquisition, Murray said.
He would not specify how big a war-chest CBA had.  
Meanwhile, Murray said the squeeze in home loan margins from about 300 basis points early last year to about 150 basis points now may have reached its limit.
CBA stunned the home lending market on Wednesday when it cut its key variable home mortgage rate to 7.55 percent from 8.25 percent, its second unilateral rate cut in less than a year. A similar sized unilateral cut in May last year was seen as the catalyst to a significant cut in big bank home loan margins.
"We're either at or fast approaching a margin which is very competitive in world terms for home mortgages," Murray told reporters.  
"I therefore believe that the process from here will be incremental."
Murray also took the opportunity to dismiss speculation that CBA was about to securitise its entire home loan portfolio and return the then un-necessary capital to shareholders.
He said the global trend  mutual funds would increase the pressure for funding mortgages through securitisation.
"This does not mean that we are going to run out tomorrow and securitise our whole home loan book because there is not enough buyers out there and enough funds to take it because of their asset allocations," he said.  
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian television network, The Seven Network Ltd, is expected to report a 25-30 percent higher pre-abnormal annual net profit on Monday, but analysts said this rise was likely to disguise a second half profit slowdown.
"Second half sales growth is going to be quite modest because the Ten Network and Seven lost to Nine," said one Sydney analyst.
"And post-Olympics the group hasn't bounced back," he said.
Seven had the Australian TV rights to the Atlanta Olympic Games, after it closed its books on June 30.  
The median forecast in BZW Australia's Barceps survey of analysts was for a pre-abnormals net profit for the year to June 30 of A$114 million.
Forecasts range from A$105 million to A$120.7 million and compares with the A$88.5 million posted in 1994/95.
But that 1994/95 figure was cut heavily by a bungle over discounted advertising rates, which cost Seven A$20-30 million and which has been reversed.
A A$114 million net profit would also represent slow growth from the already booked first half profit of A$91.88 million.  
Seven managing director Gary Rice said in April he expected a better second half in 1995/96 than for the discounting-affected second half of 1994/95.
Seven has also said it expected advertising sales in 1995/96 would be six to seven percent higher for the year, after sales growth of 7.5 percent in the first half of 1995/96.
Analysts said ratings losses to the dominant Nine Network, owned by Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, had softened advertising sales. The Ten Network, majority owned by Canada's Canwest, had also been hit by Nine's strength, they said.  
Some said higher costs linked to an expansion of news and current affairs programming may also restrain second half profits.
"Most people will be looking out to see that the move to more news and current affairs will not have caused a blowout in costs," said Burdett, Buckridge and Young media analyst Vince Pepe.
"They'll also be looking for Seven's future strategy in relation to news and current affairs, given the existing strategy appears to have floundered in some time slots," Pepe said.  
Seven recently cancelled a new 5.00 p.m. national news programme after a short trial because of poor ratings and the recently launched Witness flagship current affairs programme has not been a runaway ratings hit.
Other analysts said Seven may have contained its costs.
"Costs have been pretty well contained in the four to five percent industry range, by dropping costs and laying off people quietly to accommodate the extra news and current affairs push," said a Sydney media analyst.
Analysts would also focus on further details about the future of Hollywood film studio, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.  
Seven and Kirk Kerkorian's Tracinda Corp agreed in July to pay US$1.3 billion for the studio.
"We'll be looking for any further indications on MGM because when the actual transaction has been completed I believe the business plan there will have changed quite considerably," said Pepe.
Seven itself is 15 percent owned by News Corp Ltd and about 20 percent owned by Seven chairman Kerry Stokes.
Seven's shares were down five cents at A$3.80 at 2.15 p.m. (0415 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian-based pallet hire and logistics group Brambles Industries Ltd loaded up another strong first-half profit rise on Friday, but was quick to warn investors not to expect such strength in the second half.
Brambles chief executive John Fletcher said slow European and Australian economies, along with a smaller boost from lower net interest costs, would slow growth in the second half.
Fletcher told Reuters analysts should not get too excited by a better-than-expected first-half result and should hold on to the full-year profit forecasts they made before the result.
"The message is that the existing market expectations for the full year that were there before this announcement, they're still looking okay," Fletcher said.
He said the average of the Barceps survey of analysts' forecasts for the 1996/97 year to June 30 was A$240.3 million (US$186.2 million)
This would be a near 12 percent rise for the full year on the A$214.8 million pre-abnormal net profit posted in 1995/96.
Earlier, Brambles reported its first-half net profit before abnormals rose 14.8 percent to A$117.2 million.
There were no abnormal profits or losses in the period.
Brambles also raised its dividend to 35 cents a share from 34 cents.
Fletcher said the higher profit reflected strong growth in North America and higher earnings despite difficult conditions in Australia and Europe.
Revenue fell A$145 million to A$1.454 billion in the half.
"Lower net interest resulting from the proceeds of the sale of under-performing activities in Australia and Europe, and lower interest rates, also contributed to the overall improvement," Fletcher said.
Net interest expenses fell to A$22.3 million from A$32.3 million in the half because debt was repaid after asset sales.
Brambles said its Australian units continued to perform sluggishly overall, "with little evidence of an improvement in those areas of the economy in which the company operates".
Subdued economic conditions in continental Europe continued to affect growth from Brambles' European activites, it said.
"But this was offset by the good gains achieved by the CHEP (pallet hire) and Cleanaway joint ventures," Brambles said.
Brambles' CHEP joint venture is with Britain's GKN Plc.
Brambles said it experienced good profit growth from its U.S. activities.
Earnings before interest, tax and abnormals at U.S. operations rose to A$26.2 million in the half from A$17.8 million in the same period a year earlier.
"If only I had three Americas," Fletcher said.
Brambles said it was talking to General Electric Capital and General Electric Plastics about the supply and leasing of plastic pallets in the United States and Europe.
It said it had worked with various parties on the development of a plastic pallet, but had yet to find a pallet as strong, durable or cheap as wood.
Fletcher told Reuters that Brambles was a lot closer to finding an acceptable plastic pallet this year than in previous years. "We could be within 12 months of finding something," he said.
Brambles shares closed unchanged on Friday at A$21.70, after having earlier risen to an intra-day high of A$21.94.
(A$ = US$0.77)
The consortium building the 2000 Olympic Stadium in Sydney has sought permission from the International Olympic Committee to sell Games tickets overseas after struggling to find local buyers for its financing scheme.
The Stadium Australia group -- hoping to ride the coat-tails of Atlanta Games enthusiasm -- said in October it wanted to raise A$364.4 million (US$282.4 million) by selling packages of Olympic tickets, equity and stadium memberships.
But a lack of local buyers for the 34,400 packages, which sell for A$10,000 each, has twice forced underwriters to extend their deadline for the novel Olympic float.
As a result of the slow demand, Stadium Australia want to sell the ticket component of the package separately to overseas buyers after originally restricting the scheme to the domestic market.
"We are in negotiation with the International Olympic Committee (IOC). We are also talking to the Olympic committees in the U.S., U.K. and several other countries," a Stadium Australia spokeswoman told Reuters.
The underwriters must fund the project regardless of whether all the packages are sold, thus guaranteeing the completion of the 110,000-seat stadium, which is due to open in 1999 at a cost of A$660 million.
Each "Gold" package includes one seat at each of the stadium sessions during the Olympics, a seat at most sporting events at the stadium until 2029 and 1,000 shares in the Stadium company.
But city brokers said on Friday only about one third of the packages had been sold as Olympic enthusiasm in the wake of Australia's record medal haul at Atlanta had waned and the local economy had slowed.
"There's just not much demand for them and the talk around is only about 30 to 40 percent are spoken for," one Sydney broker said.
Other brokers said repeated attempts to interest private clients had met with little success.
If the brokers are correct and the consortium fails to raise any further finance, the stadium's underwriters could be exposed to a shortfall of about A$240 million when the share and ticket offer closes on March 27.
The Stadium Australia spokeswoman said the offer was not in trouble and there was enough time to raise the capital, adding that "considerably more than one third" of the packages had already been sold.
"The demand has not been as great as originally anticipated locally but we have experienced the reverse internationally," the spokeswoman said. "It is a question not of whether we are going to sell them but who we are going to sell them to."
The four underwriters are ANZ Securities, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Macquarie Bank Ltd, and ABN Amro Hoare Govett.
(A$1 = US$0.7750)
Transport equipment hire and logistics firm Brambles Industries Ltd said on Friday that it was on track to achieve current market expectations for a full year net profit of about A$240 million.
Brambles chief executive John Fletcher told Reuters in an interview that analysts should not extrapolate the stronger than expected first half profit growth into the full 1996/97 year.
"The message is that the existing market expectations for the full year that were there before this announcement, they're still looking O.K," Fletcher said.  
He said the average of the Barceps survey of analysts' forecasts for the 1996/97 year to June 30 was A$240.3 million.
This would be a near 12 percent rise for the full year on the A$214.8 million pre-abnormal net profit posted in 1995/96.
Earlier, Brambles reported its first half net profit rose 14.3 percent to A$117.2 million. There were no abnormals. Pre-abnormal profit rose almost 15 percent to A$117.2 million.
But Brambles warned in its profit statement that it expected the rate of improvement evident in the first half to slow in the second half because of difficult trading conditions in Australia and Europe and a smaller boost from lower net interest costs.  
Fletcher said economic conditions in Australia remained subdued in the transport and logistics sectors and were likely to stay that way for the remainder of the 1996/97 year.
"Volumes are flat and the unions are looking for five to six percent per annum wage increases," he said.
He said Brambles and others servicing the manufacturing sector, which was under intense price pressure from imports, were stuck between union demands for higher wages and the inability to pass higher costs in the form of higher prices.
"I don't think we're in a position to look for wage increases of four to five percent," he said.
Australia's largest shopping mall owner, Westfield Holdings Ltd, announced on Wednesday its U.S. arm would list on the New York Stock Exchange in May and raise US$400 million in an initial public offering.
Westfield America Inc would then use the proceeds to go on a US$500 million shopping spree around the United States, buying out Westfield's partners in the shopping malls it already owns and buying new malls.
The resulting group would then be the fourth largest listed shopping mall owner in the United States, Westfield Holdings chairman Frank Lowy said.
"We opened a little door before and now we're opening a huge door for us to expand our business in the United States," Lowy told a news conference.
Lowy said Westfield America Trust would list its U.S. vehicle, CenterMark Properties Inc, as Westfield America Inc, diluting its 67.2 percent stake in CenterMark to about 50 percent.
Westfield America would then first buy Westfield Holdings' 50 percent stake in the Garden State Plaza shopping centre in New Jersey for US$145 million.
About US$210 million would then be available to buy out Westfield America's partners in shopping malls it already partly owns and to buy up new malls.
Lowy told the news conference the US$210 million of equity would be combined with debt to buy out partners and new malls.
"We see borrowings of maybe US$150 million to US$200 million, which gives us an opportunity to consider acquisitions of about US$350 million altogether," Lowy said.
Ownership of U.S. shopping malls was increasingly transferring from private or family companies into listed public companies, and Westfield's U.S. listing would help accelerate the process, he said.
Lowy said many of Westfield America's partners were family concerns or closed-end funds, many of which wanted to cash in their stakes. Closed-end funds must cash in their investments after a certain period.
Some were also unable to inject the extra capital needed to continually re-develop or expand the shopping malls, Lowy said. "Some of our partners just do not have the cash, and now they have the option of watering down (their holdings) or selling out," Lowy said.
Westfield had said last year when listing the Australian unit trust vehicle for Centermark, Westfield America Trust, that it planned to list CenterMark in the United States within five years. Lowy said strong U.S. market conditions had led to the earlier than expected listing.
The offering is planned for May and is being underwritten by Merrill Lynch &amp; Co, but Lowy said the timing may change if the U.S. market slumps before then.
"If conditions change, we'll have to reassess," he said.
Westfield officials said the U.S. listing gave the Australian-based company more flexibility when acquiring shopping malls in the United States, as it opened up access to the U.S. debt markets.
The ability to offer U.S. listed shares to shopping mall owners instead of cash would also open up a new range of acquisition opportunities, as many sellers preferred shares to cash for tax reasons, they said.
Australia's largest shopping mall owner, Westfield Holdings Ltd, announced on Wednesday its U.S. arm would list on the New York Stock Exchange in May and raise US$400 million in an initial public offering.
Westfield America Inc would then use the proceeds to go on a US$500 million shopping spree around the United States, buying out Westfield's partners in the shopping malls it already owns and buying new malls.  
The resulting group would then be the fourth largest listed shopping mall owner in the United States, Westfield Holdings chairman Frank Lowy said.
"We opened a little door before and now we're opening a huge door for us to expand our business in the United States," Lowy told a news conference.
Lowy said Westfield America Trust would list its U.S. vehicle CenterMark Properties Inc as Westfield America Inc, diluting its 67.2 percent stake in CenterMark to about 50 percent.  
Westfield America would then first buy Westfield Holdings' 50 percent stake in the Garden State Plaza shopping centre in New Jersey for US$145 million.
About US$210 million would then be available to buy out Westfield America's partners in shopping malls it already partly owns and to buy up new malls.
Lowy told the news conference the US$210 million of equity would be combined with debt to buy out partners and new malls.
"We see borrowings of maybe US$150 million to A$200 million which gives us an opportunity to consider acquisitions of about US$350 million altogether," Lowy said.  
Ownershiop of U.S. shopping malls was increasingly transferring from private or family companies into listed public companies and Westfield's U.S. listing would help accelerate the process, he said.
Lowy said many of Westfield America's partners were family concerns or closed-end funds, many of whom wanted to cash in their stakes. Closed-end funds must cash in their investments after a certain period.
Some were also unable to inject the extra capital needed to continually re-develop or expand the shopping malls, Lowy said.  
"Some of our partners just do not have the cash and now they have the option of watering down (their holdings) or selling out," Lowy said.
Westfield had said last year when listing the Australian unit trust vehicle for Centermark, Westfield America Trust, that it planned to list CenterMark in the United States within five years. Lowy said strong U.S. market conditions had led to the earlier than expected listing.
The offering is planned for May and is being underwritten by Merrill Lynch &amp; Co, but Lowy said the timing may change if the U.S. market slumps before then.  
"If conditions change, we'll have to reassess," he said.
"It would have to be a significant change."
Westfield officials said the U.S. listing gave the Australian-based company more flexibility when acquiring shopping malls in the United States, as it opened up access to the U.S. debt markets.
The ability to offer U.S. listed shares to shopping mall owners instead of cash would also open up a new range of acquisition opportunities as many sellers preferred shares to cash for tax reasons, they said.  
Westfield America Trust units closed up one cent at A$1.14 and Westfield Holdings shares closed up ten cents at A$19.80 against a flat market overall.
Westfield Holdings has about 30 percent of Westfield America Trust units.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Building materials and energy group Boral Ltd reported a lower net profit for the first half year on Wednesday, but said it was poised to take advantage of a long awaited upturn in the house building sector.
"The building materials division is now in a position to exploit the upturn," Boral managing director Tony Berg told reporters after announcing the profit fall.
"The upturn will bring profit leverage from improved margins and price improvements and further leverage will come from lowering costs," Berg said.  
Earlier, Boral reported a A$93.16 million net profit for the six months to December 31, down from A$169.71 million in the same period a year earlier. This was due in large part to a A$49.5 million abnormal profit booked from an asset sale in the previous comparable period.
Net profit pre-abnormals fell to A$96 million from A$120 million the previous year and compared with market expectations for a pre-abnormals net of about A$90 million.
Analysts said the result was a touch above expectations, largely because of a much stronger result from Boral's U.S. building materials operations.
Investment bank Natwest Markets Australia Ltd said on Tuesday it aimed to hold on to its leading market share in equities broking in Australia in 1997 but would stay clear of the burgeoning mortgage securitisation sector.
"The first thing is to make sure we maintain our market position," Natwest Markets Australia Ltd chief executive Peter St George told Reuters in an interview. "We want to broaden and deepen our penetration of the market," St George said.  
Natwest Markets currently leads the rankings of equities brokers in Australia as measured by the latest Australian Stock Exchange data with a 9.8 percent market share.
St George said Natwest would need to widen its research and distribution activities to keep up with the likely changes in the Australian stock market over the next two to three years.
The impending privatisation of Australia's largest telecoms group, Telstra Corp, as well as the sale of government-owned airports and the demutualisation of Australia's largest insurance and investment group, The Australian Mutual Provident Society, would change the shape of the market overall, he said.  
"If you look on a two to three year horizon you should see big movements in the market in telecoms, infrastructure and insurance," St George said.
"These are some changes for people to get their research capabilities and international delivery mechanisms in place for," he said.
Earlier on Tuesday Natwest Markets Australia, a unit of National Westminister Bank Plc, reported a 40 percent rise in operating profit before tax to A$70.5 million for calendar 1996.  
"The areas we will focus on in terms of the equities business are advancing some of the work we've been doing in the structured products and derivatives products," St George said.
Natwest's debt and corporate finance divisions would aim to extend non-government debt operations but would stay away from the structuring of securitised mortgage deals for now, he said.
"In the debt markets, we're getting away from some of the meatier bonds like government bonds and looking into some of the other areas, like corporate bonds and infrastructure financing," he said.  
St George said Natwest Markets was involved on a large scale in the mortgage securitisation market in the United States and elsewhere but would concentrate on the wholesale sector in Australia.
"It's quite labour intensive. It hasn't been attractive to us because we don't think the profits are there," he said.
"I wouldn't particularly think we're going to make a big move in there at this point in time."
Natwest Australia Corporate Finance currently manages the wholesale securitised vehicles, Prime Asset Vehicle (PAV) 1 and PAV 2.  
"They take really high quality paper and recyle those into the United States and international markets," he said.
"We're not aiming at that same segment of the market as Macquarie does from Australia," he added.
Fellow investment bank and broker Macquarie Bank Ltd has dominated the burgeoning mortgage securitisation market in Australia in recent years.
Macquarie's PUMA Management Ltd plans to raise A$3 billion in 1997 to fund securitised mortgages, having raised A$3.508 billion since its first bond issue in June 1993.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Retailing group Coles Myer Ltd is expected to report its first profit rise in almost two years on Thursday, with improved margins helping to offset sluggish sales growth and boost first half profit by about five percent.
Analysts said they expected Coles Myer to report a net profit before abnormals in the 26 weeks to January 26 of about A$200 million to A$205 million, up from the A$194.5 million in the first half of 1995/96.  
This would be Coles' first profit rise since 1995 and follows a two-year horror run of board turmoil and controversy over corporate governance.
Analysts said they expected margins to have improved most at Coles' K-Mart discount department store chain in pre-Christmas trading, thanks to a refusal to discount heavily.
They said the strong margins evident at K-Mart's major competitor, Woolworth Ltd's Big W, were a good indicator.  
"Kmart was a disaster last year and given Big-W had a good result in the first half in a difficult environment, people are expecting Kmart to have improved as well," said Macquarie Equities analyst Simon Shakesheff said.
"It's just a question of how much," he said. Shakesheff is forecasting a A$200 million net profit for the half year and a A$319 million profit for the full year.
Kmart produced earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) of A$50.6 million in the first half of 1995/96, down from A$93.2 million the previous comparable half.  
Savage pre and post-Christmas discounting in 1995 cut the EBIT margin during the half to 2.9 percent from 5.5 percent.
Analysts said they also expected a slight margin improvement to boost performance at Coles' Myer-Grace department store chain, although not to the same extent as KMart.
"They look like they (the Coles group) are recovering," said one retail analyst, who was forecasting a A$205 million net profit for the half and A$302 million for the full year.
"Their Christmas trading has been better and they've done better in department stores than some of the others like David Jones," the analyst said.  
Coles' supermarket division was also seen improving as sales have held up in the food sector at the expense of the wider apparel and merchandise sectors.
The Coles group has already posted its sales result for the six months to January 26, showing overall sales growth of 5.4 percent to A$9.945 billion. This compared with 8.6 percent sales growth in the first half of 1995/96.
Analysts also said profits from property sales in the first half would help boost the pre-abnormal profit as Coles puts property sales profits above the line.  
Coles said in December it would settle about A$705 million of property sales in the first half of 1996/97, having sold around A$830 million worth of property since July 1996.
Analysts expect Coles' slight improvement from its low base to continue in the second half year, with forecasts for the full year ranging from A$285 million to A$350 million and averaging A$309.7 million.
This compares with the A$302 million net profit before abnormals posted in 1995/96, which was itself down 28 percent on 1994/95.  
Brierley Investments Ltd, through its Australian unit Consolidated Investments Ltd, owns 7.4 percent of Coles Myer.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Papua New Guinea's (PNG) Australian-listed stocks slumped five to ten percent on Monday as international investors fearful of a law and order meltdown reacted to the army's attempt to force the PNG government aside.
Orogen Minerals Ltd, which is 51 percent owned by the PNG government, was one of the hardest hit, slumping seven percent or 24 cents to A$3.20. 
Other stocks jagged as much as ten percent lower in increasingly hectic afternoon trade as reports emerged that the head of the army and the police commissioner had told Prime Minister Julius Chan to resign or be forced aside in two days.
The army and police are angry the government has employed mercenaries to help the armed forces subdue seccessionists on Bougainville Island.
Brokers and analysts said investors feared an army mutiny and possible civil unrest in the capital Port Moresby would spread to the remote areas where most of PNG's huge gold mines and oil projects are located.  
"The danger is if any local tribes use this dispute as an excuse to act up and this would affect local mining operations," said Shaw Stockbroking research director Michael Heffernan.
Major mining projects in Papua New Guinea's rugged hinterlands like the giant OK Tedi project, controlled by the Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, are often in dispute with local tribal groups.
Analysts said investors' need look no further than the now-dormant copper project on Bougainville to see what happens when the central government and armed forces lose control.  
The Bougainville Copper mine was shut down in 1989 when rebellious landowners who wanted bigger returns from the project sabotaged the mine and began the current recessionist revolt.
"There's always a certain amount of civil unrest, but if the more militant groups in the regions use this as an excuse to party as it were, it could disrupt operations," Heffernan said.
Local brokers became increasingly pessimistic through the afternoon, moving in anticipation of an expected selloff by overseas institutional investors.  
"I don't know what the outcome of that (situation) is going to be but it seems to me to be very dismal," said broker Kevin Lourey of Melbourne-based brokerage, Peake Lands Kirwan.
"The international reaction to this sort of situation is usually very negative," said resources analyst David Walker at broker ABN AMRO Hoare Govett
"The fear is that tonight, particularly on the London exchange, where most of the resource investment in this part of the world comes fron, there will be a strong negative reaction," Walker said.  
The worst-affected stock in the afternoon rout was oil producer and explorer Oil Search Ltd, which fell 8.5 percent or 24 cents to A$2.60.
Bougainville Copper Ltd, which is controlled by RTZ Corp Plc-CRA Ltd fell five cents to 55 cents.
Analysts said the government's moves over next day or two would be crucial in limiting any further damage. Prime Minister Chan had yet to respond to the army ultimatum by 0820 GMT.
"The next 24 hours is crucial for the Chan government and also for the value of these investments," Walker said.  
"It's important that the situation becomes as clear as it can very quickly in order not only for the stability of the country, but for the value of the investments."
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373 1800
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd is expected to report on Thursday a stagnant net profit for the year to June 30, held back by soaring newsprint costs and losses from its burgeoning Star TV operations, analysts said.
The median forecast in BZW's BARCEPS broker survey is for a A$1.343 billion net profit before abnormals for the year, a virtual replica of the A$1.342 billion profit posted in 1994/95.
Analysts said News may even struggle to match last year's result, particularly given its lower than expected third quarter result.  
"It's got to be a reasonably strong last quarter to match that (1994/95) figure," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett media analyst John Bell.
"I doubt there'll be many surprises on the upside," he said.
News posted a A$281 million net profit before abnormals in the third quarter, below expectations of about A$300 million and taking profits for the first nine months of the year to A$944 million.
The result is expected around 8.30 a.m. Australian time on Thursday (2230 GMT Wednesday).  
Analysts said News' 1995/96 profits had been restrained generally by the higher paper costs, a U.K. cover price war and continued losses from its Star TV operation in Hong Kong.
"People will look at newspapers because that will reflect higher newsprint prices and the impact of the newspaper price war," said one Melbourne media analyst.
Margins on News' British newspapers were seen pressured in the final few months of the year by cover price discounts ahead of the Olympics.
"There was a little bit of renewed competition on the Monday cover prices pre-Olympics," Bell said.  
"Margins may have slipped a little bit in the last few months of the year," he said.
Star TV was seen pumping out another US$90 million to US$100 million of losses for the year as it establishes itself in the potentially lucrative Asian satellite television markets.
"I would expect a full year loss of US$90 million given what we've been told so far and I've seen nothing to change that," the Melbourne analyst said.
"I would see it somewhere in excess of of US$100 million," Bell said.  
Continued strong earnings from U.S. television and films are seen offsetting somewhat the newsprint and Star TV losses.
Looking ahead however, analysts are confident News' profits can start growing again in 1996/97, boosted by potentially lower newsprint prices and an earnings surge from the hit U.S. special effects movie, "Independence Day".
"'Independence Day' could add up to US$200 million to the bottom line," said Bell, who forecast net profit rising to A$1.5 billion in 1996/97.  
"The 1996/97 result will show some clear profit growth as much as anything because of paper prices and 'Independence Day'," the Melbourne analyst said, who forecast a A$1.6 billion net profit.
News' share price was down one cent at A$6.49 at 2.00 p.m. (0400 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Analysts expectations that New Zealand-based whitegoods manufacturer Fisher and Paykel Ltd would post a slightly lower profit in 1996/97 were about right, chief executive Gary Paykel said on Thursday.
"I've been reading some of the local analysts reports and I think they've got it pretty right," Paykel told Reuters in an interview while in Australia opening an expanded factory.
He said was referring to research reports from J.B. Were, Hendry Hay McIntosh and others forecasting a lower profit in the year to March 31.  
"They're not far off the mark," he said.
"They're just saying that with the tough trading conditions it does look as if it will be a little bit less than probably last year."
He said Fisher and Paykel itself could not make a forecast, but that the analysts were about right.
Some analysts have forecast Fisher and Paykel's full year net profit would fall to about NZ$38 million from the NZ$39.25 million posted in 1995/96.  
Fisher and Paykel reported a first half net profit of NZ$19.2 million in early November and forecast then that full year profits would similar to or slightly better than in 1995/96.
Paykel said that New Zealand market conditions were tough and Fisher and Paykel had been hurt by the loss of an exclusive distribution agreement with appliance retailer Noel Leeming.
"That is impacting on sales -- not to the extent that we thought it would -- but obviously they were about 15 percent of sales in New Zealand and that takes some time to make up," he said.  
Fisher and Paykel had signed an exclusive distribution agreement with Australian-based retailer Harvey Norman Holdings Ltd for their yet-to-be opened New Zealand stores and was hopeful this would prove successful.
"It (the New Zealand market) is very tough now and I don't see the market coming back too much this calendar year, but the NZ fundamentals are still good and things will pick up gradually -- but not this year."
Conditions in the Australian whitegoods market, where Fisher and Paykel has a market share in the low 20 percent range, were looking better, he said.  
Fisher and Paykel was strongest in the higher quality washing machine market sectors in Australia, where it currently had a 40 percent share, Paykel said.
It was weaker in the oven, refrigeration, dishwashing and budget washing machine parts of the market, where it had generally had less than 20 percent market share.
But Paykel said the opening of an expanded factory in Brisbane and the launch of several new products in Australia would boost its market share in these sectors.
He said Fisher and Paykel had just launched a budget model washing machine in Australia retailing for about A$649 each.  
"It's a real competitive, agrressive move and let's see what our competitors do," he said.
Fisher and Paykel's major Australian competitors, Email Ltd and Southcorp Holdings Ltd, offer models with prices of A$499 to A$599.
"We think they're (prices) as low as they can go, and if that's the case we'll see a lot of volume given its features," he said, adding he hoped Fisher and Paykel could raise its share of the budget market to 40 percent.
Fisher and Paykel's share price closed unchanged at NZ$5.15 on Thursday. -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Papua New Guinea's Australian-listed stocks rallied in active trade on Thursday as foreign investors breathed a sigh of relief at the peaceful resolution of the Pacific nation's 10-day political crisis.
Analysts and brokers said investors welcomed Prime Minister Sir Julius Chan's decision late on Wednesday to step aside, which appeared to have calmed an explosive situation and would allow a peaceful transition to a new government.  
"Everyone is relieved that the parliamentary process actually worked and that we didn't go into a period of military control," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett Head of Mining Research David Walker.
"The expectation that the mid-year elections can be brought forward and that there can be an orderly resolution of the impasse has been accepted well," Walker said.
Chan stood down on Wednesday under widespread pressure to quit for his hiring of mercenaries to crush an uprising on copper-rich Bougainville island.  
Mining investments group Orogen Minerals Ltd, which is owned 51 percent by the PNG government, closed up eight cents at A$3.10. Oil producer and explorer Oil Search Ltd, which is the largest of the pure Papua New Guinea stocks listed in Australia, closed up 13 cents at A$2.70.
The developer of the one of the world's largest gold deposits at Lihir in PNG, Lihir Gold Ltd, rose two cents to A$2.15. Papua New Guinea retailer and trader, Collins and Leahy Ltd closed up 25 cents at A$3.50 while Bougainville Copper Ltd closed up five cents at 60 cents.  
Papua New Guinea does not have its own stock market, with most large public companies listing on Australia's exchange.
However, analysts said PNG stocks were unlikely to recover all their losses of the past ten days because investors remained somewhat wary of the resource-rich South Pacific nation while the makeup and policies of its new government were undecided.
"It's positive that Chan's (stepped aside) and it should calm the situation up there somewhat," said ANZ Securities gold analyst David Kauler.  
"However, it's clear PNG is now in election mode and there's still a period of three to six months of uncertainty ahead ... but it is a cheap time to be buying some of those PNG stocks, particularly Lihir on the gold side," Kauler said.
Investor confidence remained bruised by images of street riots and the tense standoff between the army and government.
"It's going to be a difficult, volatile period for investment in the country," Kauler said.
"You're going to see a fight between people who see a cheap buying opportunity and other people saying we don't know what the policy is going to be for six months, so let's steer clear."  
Analysts also said the resolution of the political crisis could bring higher taxes for foreign miners, although any new government was unlikely to restrict entry to resource groups.
ABN AMRO's Walker said the new government would have to look at raising taxes, possibly even the 1.25 percent mining royalty to solve its chronic budget deficits problem.
However, the return to stability in Papua New Guinea at the same time as the controversy over the supposedly huge Busang gold deposit in nearby Indonesia had also created a window of opportunity for extra resource investment, analysts said.  
"PNG, having overcome its immediate problems, has really got to settle down and project an image of stability, because there will be capital funds coming out of Indonesia potentially available for PNG projects," Walker said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The U.S.-Australian development of the giant Bayu-Undan gas field in the Timor Sea cleared its biggest hurdle on Wednesday when BHP Petroleum and Phillips Petroleum agreed that BHP should be the sole operator.
Joint venture participants said the agreement meant they could now consider exactly how to develop the A$4 billion field and whether to build a liquified natural gas (LNG) processing plant onshore near Darwin in the Northern Territory or build such a floating plant.  
"This agreement is the most fundamental development in terms of defining the project," said Petroz NL Finance Manager Rob Crook.
The field, which was last estimated to have proven and probable reserves of 3.1 trillion cubic feet (tcf), is straddled by two joint venture groups.
"It's a very, very large world-scale discovery," said Petroz' Crook.
Getting the two groups to agree on who would operate the facilities needed to jointly exploit the field and how the proceeds would be divided up was a crucial step, Crook said.  
The "Bayu" side of the field is covered by the Zone of Cooperation Agreement (ZOCA) 91-13 is owned by a Phillips-led joint venture that includes Oryx Energy Co of the U.S. with 25 percent and Britain's Hardy Oil &amp; Gas Plc with 15 percent. Phillips has 60 percent.
The "Undan" side of the field covered by ZOCA 91-12 is owned by a BHP-led joint venture which includes Petroz with 13.371 percent, Santos Ltd with 21.426 percent and Indonesia's Inpex Sahul with 21.21 percent. BHP has 42.417 percent.  
The ZOCAs were made possible by a treaty between Australia and Indonesia and are a key factor in the relatively warm diplomatic ties between the two neighbours.
BHP said meetings of joint venture participants in Melbourne late last week had selected BHP Petroleum as the unit operator of the field. BHP Petroleum is a unit of the Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, Australia's largest company and the half-owner of the Bass Strait oil fields off the Victorian coast.
"The single field extends across both contract areas and any development will be carried out under the framework of a unitisation agreement and utilise shared facilities," BHP said.  
Petroz said in a separate statement the joint venturers had decided on the upstream liquids and condensate phase of the project, but had yet to decide on where the downstream LNG plant would be located.
"The upstream phase of the project consists of a liquids stripping/gas recycling operation whereby condensate and LPG (Liquid Petroleum Gas) are separated from the gas stream offshore and transported by tankers to market," Petroz said.
"It is expected that the offshore liquids recovery project will be integrated with an LNG production facility," it said.  
"Both offshore and onshore locations for the LNG facilities are under consideration," it said.
The development of the field was expected to start in 1998, leading to the first production of condensate and LPG in 2001.
Petroz's Crook said the upstream condensate and LPG facility already decided on had been estimated to cost around A$1.5 billion to build. He said it was envisaged the field would produce about 3-4 tcf, 230 million barrels of gas condensate and 130 million barrels of LPG.
The field is split about 60-40 percent in favour of the BHP-led joint venture, he said.  
Northern Territory ministers are confident that BHP and Phillips will choose an onshore LNG plant with a 470 km pipeline to bring the gas from the Timor Sea. Reports have put the cost of such a plant at between A$1 billion to A$1.9 billion.
Phillips is seen favouring an onshore plant while BHP has favoured an offshore plant. An onshore plant would produce an estimated three million tonnes of LNG a year.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Underwriters to the heavily under-subscribed Stadium Australia float would not seek to cut their losses and sell the unbought passes at a discount ahead of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games, Stadium Australia chairman Peter Ritc hie said on Wednesday.
Ritchie told Reuters the underwriters would seek to sell the approximately A$200 million worth of unsold passes over the next couple of years at prices above the float's offer prices.
"They have a couple of years and they're super-confident that they'll sell them and maybe even get more for them between now and the Games," Ritchie said in an interview.
"Our existing gold members are of course concerned that they (the passes) may be discounted and I can assure them that that won't happen because as the Games get closer there'd be more recognition that the prime seats that go with the gold packages wi ll get more and more valuable," he said.
Earlier, Ritchie confirmed market speculation of a A$200 million-plus shortfall in the A$364.4 million float of Stadium gold and platinum passes.
The 35,000 passes offered included packages of main stadium tickets to the 2000 Olympics, a 30-year stadium membership and an equity stake in the stadium itself.
"My rough top-of-the-head calculation is that it is about 40 percent (sold)," he said.
The underwriters, ANZ Securities, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Macquarie Bank Ltd and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett, are not due to announce the exact results of the float until this Friday.
They must fund the project regardless of whether all the packages are sold, thus guaranteeing the completion of the 110,000-seat stadium, which is due to open in 1999 in time for a season of pre-Olympic competitions.
The Stadium Australia float, which closed last Thursday, had been open for almost six months, more than twice as long as most share offers.
Its offer of 34,400 gold packages at A$10,000 each and 600 platinum passes at A$33,000 each opened on October 7 and its closing date has been extended twice due to lack of demand.
Brokers said the float had been too complicated for investors to generate enough enthusiasm. Ritchie acknowledged the underwriters had been over-confident and that its structure may have been difficult.
He said the underwriters were targeting a sharemarket listing for the stapled stadium shares and memberships around April 11.
Once the stadium was opened in 1999 however, the stadium shares and the stadium memberships would be unstapled and be traded separately.
Ritchie said the stadium would manage a private market for the stadium memberships, similar to those managed for other Australian stadiums like the Melbourne and Sydney Cricket grounds.
He said he expected the new Sydney stadium memberships would be worth more than those for these other grounds.
"There's no reason to think that our memberships won't sell for more than their's because our facilities are so much better and we'll know then who the hirees (sporting group users) are."
He said Stadium Australian already had strong expressions of interest from the Australian Football League (AFL) which runs the Victorian-based Australian rules competition.
"Strangely enough when it's not really their territory, they've been the most enthusiastic and then we'd have to reconfigure the stadium specification for an oblong field."
Ritchie said the stadium would be designed with mobile stands so after the Olympics the stadium could be converted into an oval easily.
"You put the big stands on wheels and you roll them back for the oval." Stadium Australia had also had talks with the major winter sporting codes in New South Wales, Rugby Union and Rugby League.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800 (c) Reuters Limited 1997
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) chairman Allan Fels said on Thursday that he had a neutral attitude about Westpac Banking Corp's A$1.435 billion bid for Bank of Melbourne Ltd.
Fels also confirmed that he had told Westpac informally two years ago that the anti-monopoly regulator would be hesitant to allow a Westpac takeover of the smaller regional bank.
However, he said that the ACCC acknowledged then that structural change may occur to allow such a takeover at a future date.  
"We have a neutral attitude," Fels told Reuters in an interview.
"We look at mergers on a case-by-case basis at the time they happen. We're awaiting a submission on it and we'll be doing market inquiries," Fels said.
Fels said the earlier informal talks occurred in September 1995 when Westpac sought ACCC for approval for its takeover of Perth-based Challenge Bank.  
"During that time we discussed with Westpac wider issues about regional mergers in general. Obviously that touched on wider possibilities then just Westpac-Challenge," Fels said.
"We then issued a statement which by implication made it look as if we would have quite a bit of hesitation about Westpac-Bank of Melbourne, however there was no formal proposal put to us," he said.
"At that time we would have been hesitant had a formal proposition been put."  
Fels said, however, the commission took the unusual step of saying that this hesitation about Westpac-Bank of Melbourne only applied at that time.
"We did say at the time very explicitly that this was our view at THAT time," he said.
"We said that a couple of times, we don't normally say that sort of thing.
"We were signalling that we were aware that this matter would at some point have to be looked at again because people keep arguing that there's been structural change in the market."  
Fels was careful not to state whether he thought there had been structural change since 1995.
"That's what's been put to us by the parties," he said.
"There've been changes (generally), but we haven't really evaluated their impact," he said, adding he remained neutral on the question of structural change.
But later he told ABC radio he did not agree currently with those arguing there had been relevant, significant structural change in the regional banking sector.
"The question is: has there been a change of circumstance.  
"The parties argue 'Yes.' We haven't, certainly, taken that view at this time but we will look at their submissions," he said.
Fels said it would take the ACCC at least a month to make its decision and would take the Wallis inquiry's report into account, but would not be bound by it.
Earlier Westpac said it would present a strong case that the takeover was pro-competitive.
The two banks said they would merge their retail operations in Victoria and trade under the Bank of Melbourne brand name with local management.  
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Bank of Melbourne Ltd announced on Thursday it had agreed to a A$1.435 billion takeover bid by Westpac Banking Corp that valued the Victorian-based bank at 2.1 times net assets.
The two banks said they would merge their retail operations in Victoria and trade under the Bank of Melbourne brand name with local management, subject to the approval of Treasurer Peter Costello and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).  
Westpac said it would offer A$9.75 for each Bank of Melbourne ordinary share, including a full franked 90 cent per share special dividend.
Shareholders had a choice of receiving the A$8.85 balance in cash or in the form of one Westpac share plus up to A$1.85 in cash, it said.
Westpac would offer A$15.36 in cash for each converting preference share or a combination of Westpac shares and cash to a maximum of A$1.36.
The offer represented an earnings multiple of 15.2 times 1997 prospective earnings as forecast by Barceps.  
"This represented 2.1 times net assets which was comparable to the 2.1 times net assets paid by St George Bank for Advance Bank and the 2.1 times net assets paid by Westpac to Challenge shareholders," Bank of Melbourne said.
Bank of Melbourne and Westpac, who must convince the ACCC that their merger does not lessen competition in Victoria, said they would present a strong pro-competitive case to the ACCC.
"Our regional banking approach will ensure Bank of Melbourne becomes a stronger competitive force in Victoria and retains its local indentity," Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss said.  
"This approach which was established in Western Australia and New Zealand will provide the framework for Victoria in delivering local product and marketing discretion, local credit decision making with Westpac's overall credit policy guidelines, local personnel management and local community sponsorship," Joss said.
The ACCC has previously said it would not allow a merger that left a state market without a significant regional bank and the ACCC reportedly rejected an informal merger approach by the two banks two years ago. The ACCC said they would carefully examine the latest merger proposal over the next several weeks.  
Meanwhile, the Treasurer Peter Costello said he would not even consider the merger application until he had released the official Wallis Inquiry into financial market regulation and the government had considered its response. This could take months.
"Any application for a merger between Westpac and the Bank of Melbourne will be determined in accordance with that policy, policy as announced in response to the Wallis report," Costello told reporters in Canberra.
"The application will not be dealt with until that policy is announced and it will be determined in accordance with that policy."  
Market reaction to the merger deal was mixed, but analysts said it appeared fair and was likely to succeed.
"I think they would have both done their homework beforehand and I think it will be successful," said Merrill Lynch Australia bank analyst Hayden Aspinall.
Bank of Melbourne shares jumped 95 cents to A$9.75 as soon as trade started but had drifted back to A$9.44 by 3.30 p.m. (0530 GMT). Westpac's shares initially jumped nine cents to A$6.96, but has since settled to be two cents down at A$6.85.  
Late on Thursday, Standard and Poor's Corp said it had affirmed the AA-minus long term and A1 plus short term counterparty ratings for Westpac and placed the A-minus long term and A2 short term counterparty ratings for the Bank of Melbourne on creditWatch positive.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The federal government is expected to release the Wallis Inquiry's report into Australia's financial system later this week and respond to some parts of the report.
The five-person inquiry, set up in June last year and chaired by businessman Stan Wallis, canvassed various options for reform in its 415 page discussion paper released in late November.  
The Inquiry's report, presented to the government last month, will make recommendations about the following options;
MERGERS
* Whether the government should abandon the current "Six Pillars" policy stopping mergers between the four major banks and the two major life insurance and superannuation groups. These six pillars are Westpac Banking Corp, National Australia Bank Ltd, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, National Mutual Holdings Ltd and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) Society.
* Whether the anti-monopolies body, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), and the Treasurer should both continue to have the power to reject or approve a bank merger. This system is known as "dual assessment."
Wallis stated his preference for treating the financial sector in the same way as any other on competition policy, implying the "Six Pillars" policy and "dual assessment" policies were unnecessary.  
FOREIGN INVESTMENT
* Whether the current ban on foreign takeovers of the big four banks should be scrapped.
OWNERSHIP OF BANKS
* Whether to scrap the current 10 percent limit on equity ownership by a single individual or group in a bank.
PRUDENTIAL REGULATION  
* Whether to combine the functions of the four regulatory bodies currently operating into a single body that provides prudential regulation and consumer protection regulation for all financial institutions. This is the "mega-regulator" option.
Currently the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) regulates banks, the Insurance and Superannuation Commission (ISC) regulates life and pension groups, the Australian Financial Institutions Commission (AFIC) regulates building societies and credit unions and the Australian Securities Commission (ASC) regulates companies generally and markets in particular.
* Whether to have a single national prudential regulator of deposit taking institutions (DTIs) including banks and credit unions, and a separate regulator for insurance companies and superannuation funds, or,
* a single prudential regulator covering both DTIs, insurance companies and pension groups, but not consumer protection regulation, or,
* to keep the current four-pronged system.
DEPOSIT INSURANCE
* Whether banks, other DTI's and the government should make more explicit to consumers that their deposits are in fact not government guaranteed, and,
* Whether a U.S.-style compulsory deposit insurance scheme should be set up to cope with depositer claims in the event a bank collapses.
BANK PAYMENTS SYSTEM
* Whether to open up access to the payments and clearing systems to non-banks, allowing them to have an account with the Reserve Bank, issue cheques and operate digi-cash, automatic teller machine and EFTPOS (Electronic Funds Transfer at Point of Sale) systems.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The Australian government will release the Wallis Inquiry's report into Australia's financial system on Wednesday at midday (0200 GMT) and is expected to respond to some parts of the report.
The five-person inquiry, set up in June last year and chaired by businessman Stan Wallis, took 268 submissions from the financial sector's main players about various options for reform.  
These players' views on various reforem options were detailed in the inquiry's 415 discussion paper released in late November.
Their positions and views on the various options follow.
SCRAPPING THE 'SIX PILLARS' MERGER POLICY
IN FAVOUR - National Australia Bank Ltd, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, Westpac Banking Corp Ltd, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, St George Bank Ltd and Australian Mutual Provident Society (AMP) and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) said bank mergers should be judged in the same way as other sectors -- by the ACCC on competition grounds alone.
They said big bank mergers would not necessarily harm competition because of new technology and global competition. Such mergers would create efficiencies, lower costs and could create Australian banks big enough to compete overseas.
AGAINST - Finance Sector Union (FSU), National Farmers Federation (NFF) and Australian Consumer Association (ACA) said big bank mergers would concentrate too much 'economic power' in too few hands.
EQUIVOCAL - The Federal Treasury said it was also concerned about the concentration of economic power, but did not explicitly favour the retention of "Six Pillars". The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) said one merger of the big four into three would not create prudential risk problems, but a cut to two banks would.
ALLOWING BIG BANK TAKEOVERS BY FOREIGNERS
IN FAVOUR - The Treasury, ACCC, St George Bank and Citibank argued foreign investment in and takeovers of big banks should be allowed because it created extra competition. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said globalisation and liberalisation of trade meant the removal of such restrictions was inevitable.
AGAINST - ANZ said foreign takeovers may see head offices shifted and create brain drain, citing the New Zealand example. Life office Colonial Ltd and Westpac noted community concern over need for Australian ownership and control of key assets.
SCRAPPING RULES LIMITING EQUITY STAKES IN BANKS TO 15 PCT IN FAVOUR - Treasury, ACCC, life office National Mutual said restrictions on industrials and other corporates owning 10 percent of a bank (or 15 percent with government approval) should be removed to open banks up to normal competitive pressures of having strong shareholders and allow better access to capital markets.
AGAINST - Life office and insurer MLC Life questioned logic of allowing anyone to buy a big stake in a bank, saying it may lead to investors pulling out in times of crisis, weakening safety of banking system.
CREATION OF A MEGA-REGULATOR, REMOVAL OF RBA'S PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISORY ROLE
IN FAVOUR - AMP, National Mutual, Colonial Mutual, NAB and the Treasury said mega-regulator would be more efficient, help break down barriers to competition and remove moral hazard problem for government of government-owned RBA being responsible for stopping banks from falling over. They also said prudential regulation and monetary policy conduct by RBA may create conflict of interest.
AGAINST - Most banks, the RBA and ISC said the RBA should keep prudential powers over banks as RBA was the only entity able to inject liquidity to save banks in crisis and had market knowledge and skills to monitor bank's prudential safety levels.
CLARIFICATION OF NON GOVERNMENT-GUARANTEE
IN FAVOUR - RBA, Treasury, Westpac, National Mutual said the current situation where deposits are not government guaranteed should be clarified so depositors know RBA will try to ensure deposits are repaid, but cannot guarantee deposits. The current implied government guarantee also favoured banks over other competitors, they said.
DEPOSIT INSURANCE SCHEME
AGAINST - Most submissions opposed deposit insurance, saying it increased moral hazard problem and penalised bank deposits in favour of mutual funds, who do not have deposit insurance.
OPENING UP ACCESS TO THE BANK PAYMENTS, SETTLEMENTS SYSTEM
IN FAVOUR - NAB, Treasury, National Mutual, Aussie Home Loans and various Credit Unions said access should be opened up to non-banks and life groups to increase competition, so long as deposit-taking institutions meet minimum capital requirements and were overseen by RBA as banks are now.
AGAINST - RBA, CBA, ANZ, Westpac, St George Bank and Colonial said the payments system was so crucial to overall health of economy, it should only be open to banks.
-- Canberra bureau 61-6 273-2730
Australia's largest banks and insurance groups, impatient to go on the merger and acquisition warpath, have had to sit on their expansion plans over the last year while they waited for the "Wallis report".
Now their wait is almost over.
The Financial System Inquiry set up in June last year by the then newly elected Liberal/National government and chaired by businessman Stan Wallis will release its report at noon (0200 GMT) on Wednesday.
Analysts expect Wallis will recommend an easing of current restrictions on mergers between Australia's six largest financial groups, unleashing acquisitive banks like National Australia Bank (NAB) to go hunting for the smaller majors like Westpac Banking Corp and ANZ Banking Group Ltd.
The waiting has already proved too much for one bank, which jumped the gun last week and announced it had agreed to take over another smaller regional bank.
Treasurer Peter Costello, who is releasing the Wallis report, pointedly said he would not approve Westpac's plan to take over Bank of Melbourne until he had considered Wallis' recommendations.
Wallis is also expected to ease rules governing foreign takeovers of Australia's largest banks and revolutionise its systems for prudential supervision.
"The expectation in the marketplace is that Wallis will lead to an easing of the rules on mergers -- that's the key issue," said Craig Drummond, head of research at one of Australia's largest brokers, J.B. Were.
Share prices of Australia's banks, and particularly those seen as most vulnerable to takeover, have rallied in recent months in expectation of an easing of the former Labor government's "Six Pillars" Policy.
Then Labor Treasurer Paul Keating instituted the "Six Pillars" policy in 1990 to stop mergers between any of Australia's big four banks, ANZ, Westpac, NAB and Commonwealth Bank of Australia and the two largest pension and life insurance groups, Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual.
Wallis said in November his inquiry would look at recommending "Six Pillars" be scrapped, leaving any judgement on a bank or life group merger to the anti-monopolies regulator, the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission (ACCC).
Those arguing for an end to "Six Pillars", including NAB, have said global competition and new technology like Internet banking meant big bank mergers would not reduce competition.
Wallis is also widely expected to cut back the number of regulators which currently monitor the prudential health of banks, credit union, insurance groups and superannuation funds.
Wallis may even remove the Reserve Bank of Australia's powers as the prudential supervisor to banks, leaving it to concentrate on operating monetary policy.
One other option being considered that could transform the big banks' share registers is a relaxation of laws which currently stop industrial companies and other non-banks from owning more than 10 percent of a bank.
The rule is supposed to stop a bank being weakened by one of its owners, if perhaps a more risky company went bankrupt.
Wallis has said he wants to foster competition and lower the barriers to ownership and participation in the banking system, possibly allowing telecommunciations groups and others to buy into banks or operate their own banks on the Internet.
The federal government will release the Wallis Inquiry's report into Australia's financial system on Wednesday at midday (0200 GMT) and is expected to respond to some parts of the report.
The five-person inquiry, set up in June last year and chaired by businessman Stan Wallis, canvassed various options for reform in its 415 page discussion paper released in late November.
The Inquiry's report, presented to the government last month, will make recommendations about the following options;
MERGERS
* Whether the government should abandon the current "Six Pillars" policy stopping mergers between the four major banks and the two major life insurance and superannuation groups. These six pillars are Westpac Banking Corp, National Australia Bank Ltd, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, National Mutual Holdings Ltd and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) Society.
* Whether the anti-monopolies body, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), and the Treasurer should both continue to have the power to reject or approve a bank merger. This system is known as "dual assessment."
Wallis stated his preference for treating the financial sector in the same way as any other on competition policy, implying the "Six Pillars" policy and "dual assessment" policies were unnecessary.
FOREIGN INVESTMENT
* Whether the current ban on foreign takeovers of the big four banks should be scrapped.
OWNERSHIP OF BANKS
* Whether to scrap the current 10 percent limit on equity ownership by a single individual or group in a bank.
PRUDENTIAL REGULATION
* Whether to combine the functions of the four regulatory bodies currently operating into a single body that provides prudential regulation and consumer protection regulation for all financial institutions. This is the "mega-regulator" option.
Currently the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) regulates banks, the Insurance and Superannuation Commission (ISC) regulates life and pension groups, the Australian Financial Institutions Commission (AFIC) regulates building societies and credit unions and the Australian Securities Commission (ASC) regulates companies generally and markets in particular.
* Whether to have a single national prudential regulator of deposit taking institutions (DTIs) including banks and credit unions, and a separate regulator for insurance companies and superannuation funds, or,
* a single prudential regulator covering both DTIs, insurance companies and pension groups, but not consumer protection regulation, or,
* to keep the current four-pronged system.
DEPOSIT INSURANCE
* Whether banks, other DTI's and the government should make more explicit to consumers that their deposits are in fact not government guaranteed, and,
* Whether a U.S.-style compulsory deposit insurance scheme should be set up to cope with depositer claims in the event a bank collapses.
BANK PAYMENTS SYSTEM
* Whether to open up access to the payments and clearing systems to non-banks, allowing them to have an account with the Reserve Bank, issue cheques and operate digi-cash, automatic teller machine and EFTPOS (Electronic Funds Transfer at Point of Sale) systems.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Treasurer Peter Costello on Wednesday announced the biggest financial reforms Australia has seen since 1983, loosening restrictions on bank and life office mergers and foreign takeovers of banks.
But against market expectations, Costello stopped short of allowing mergers between Australia's big four banks -- Westpac, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ), National Australia Bank (NAB) and the Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
He also warned foreigners they would not be allowed to buy too big a chunk of Australia's banking sector.
"Today I announce the 'Six Pillars' policy is abolished," Costello told a news conference as he released the official Wallis Financial System Inquiry.
The "Six Pillars" policy, introduced by former Labor treasurer Paul Keating, prevented mergers between Australia's major banks and the two largest pension and life insurance groups, Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual.
Costello's conservative Liberal/National coalition was elected in March last year and set up the Wallis Inquiry three months later to look at reforming Labor's policies.
Chairman Stan Wallis' brief was to set the next generation of financial reforms to follow those started in 1983 which floated the currency and removed interest rate controls.
Costello's dumping of the 'Six Pillar' policy means life insurance groups will be able to merge with the big banks and others.
But he did not let the banks off the leash.
"The government has further decided that mergers among the four major banks will not be permitted at this time," he said.
This surprised pundits and banks alike, who have waited eagerly for Costello to give the green light to big mergers.
"This (four pillars policy) will be reviewed when the government is satisfied that competition from new and established participants in the financial industry...has increased sufficiently to allow such mergers to be considered."
Brokers and analysts said this merger road-block would disappoint those who had built takeover premiums into the share prices of Westpac and ANZ, seen the likely takeover targets.
But they said the potential for foreign takeover was likely to soothe some of that disappointment.
"The equity markets are a little bit disappointed that the 'four pillars' effectively remain, but at the end of the day there is a potential for foreign takeover," said J.B. Were, head or research at Craig Drummond, adding that Westpac and ANZ were not expensive banks by global standards.
Westpac's shares closed down three percent down while ANZ fell one percent.
In contrast, the bank seen as the most likely predator in a liberalised regime, NAB, jumped 2.5 percent as the market decided it could be the juiciest target for a foreign player.
Investors were also relieved NAB would not have to make a hefty share issue soon to fund a domestic takeover.
Costello was quick however to dampen excitement about the prospect of takeover spree by foreigners, saying he would not allow them to take over as much as 60 percent of the sector.
"It can move off zero, but we won't allow it to go to sustantial foreign ownership," Costello said.
"We certainly would not allow it go as high as foreign ownership in the print media," Costello said. Foreign ownership of the print media was currently around 60 percent, he said.
Australian Treasurer Peter Costello on Wednesday announced the biggest financial reforms the country has seen since 1983, loosening restrictions on bank and life office mergers and foreign takeovers of banks.
But Costello stopped short of allowing mergers between Australia's big four banks -- Westpac, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ), National Australia Bank (NAB) and the Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
"Today I announce the 'Six Pillars' policy is abolished," Costello told a news conference.
The "Six Pillars" policy, introduced by former Labor treasurer Paul Keating, prevented mergers between Australia's major banks and the two largest pension and life insurance groups, Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual.
"The Treasurer will retain powers to reject mergers under relevant banking and insurance laws," said Costello, adding the major domestic banks would not be allowed to merge at this time.
"This will be reviewed when the government is satisfied that competition from new and established participants in the financial industry...has increased sufficiently to allow such mergers to be considered," he said.
Shares in Westpac and Australia and New Zealand Banking Group fell by around three percent as the two, previously seen as takeover targets, lost some of their sheen.
In contrast, NAB and Commonwealth Bank shares both rose as the market decided that they could fall prey to foreign predators. NAB had been seen as likely to mount a bid for Westpac and its price rise was also seen as a sign of relief that no such bid would happen.
Costello also announced the end to an outright ban on foreign takeovers of Australian banks.
"The government has decided to reverse the blanket prohibition on foreign takeovers of any of the major banks," he said.
But Costello said any large-scale transfer of Australian ownership of the financial system to foreign hands would be contrary to the national interest.
"It can move off zero, but we won't allow it to go to sustantial foreign ownership," Costello said.
"We certainly would not allow it go as high as foreign ownership in the print media," Costello said. Foreign ownership of the print media was currently around 60 percent.
Costello was responding to a government-appointed inquiry into the Australian financial system, which released its report on Wednesday recommending the biggest reforms in Australian financial industry since 1983, when the dollar was floated.
Further deregulation followed in 1984, when the government first allowed foreign banks to enter Australia.
Australia's year-old conservative government set up the Financial System Inquiry last June to boost competition.
Australian Treasurer Peter Costello's construction of a road-block in front of National Australia Bank Ltd's takeover plans has paradoxically made the bank look more attractive, analysts said on Wednesday.
But they said Costello's announcement that he would not allow a big bank merger until parts of the sector became more competitive tarnished the takeover premium built into Westpac Banking Corp's share price in particular.  
Investors who had expected National Australia Bank (NAB) to be given the green light to go on the big bank merger warpath pushed NAB's share price 2.5 percent higher, happy for now it will not have to make a big share issue to finance a takeover.
"The price movement in NAB is a reflection in the short term that the market sees it as a positive NAB won't be an acquirer because of the potential dilution of a share issue to fund such a takeover," said one senior Sydney bank analyst.
"NAB was underpriced and to the extent that a big rights isuse was hanging over the market, it makes sense for it to kick up a bit," said Macquarie Equities analyst Graham Maloney.  
NAB closed up 39 cents at A$16.11 after Treasurer Costello ended the "Six Pillars" policy banning mergers between the four major banks and two major life groups, but said the four majors would have to wait for stronger competition before merging.
Westpac Banking Corp, seen as the most vulnerable to takeover, closed down 20 cents at A$6.67, while ANZ Banking Group Ltd closed down 11 cents at A$7.89.
"There was a margin of acquisition premium there, particularly in Westpac. Now that it appears that there's unlikely to be an acquisition, it makes sense to mark it back," Maloney said.  
Analysts said however that Costello's comments about ending the current blanket ban on foreign takeovers of the major banks could offset some of the sector's disappointment.
"The equity markets are a little bit disappointed that the 'four pillars' effectively remain, but at the end of the day there is a potential for foreign takeover," said J.B. Were, head or research at Craig Drummond, adding that Westpac and ANZ were not expensive banks by global standards.
"The only risk is that there are major foreign holders that bought into both of those banks in the expectation that there could be a major bank merger," Drummond said.  
"Some traders could still cause Westpac and ANZ to be weak in the short term."
Brokers said NAB's share price appeared also to benefit from the potential for a takeover bid by a foreign group.
"(The Wallis report) hasn't ruled out the possibility of allowing a foreign bank to take over any of our banks -- it seems to strengthen NAB's position and also the Commonwealth's (Bank of Australia ) position," said Kevin Lourey, a dealer at Melbourne broker, Peake Lands Kirwan.
CBA's shares rose 28 cents to A$12.98.  
Longer term, analysts said the Wallis Inquiry's recommendations on freeing up access to the banking sector and allowing non-banks access to the payments system would sharpen competition and eventually put profit margins under pressure.
"Opening access to the payments system, I see that as critical," said Morgan Stanley banking analyst John Hobson.
"The capacity of someone like a GE Capital to have access to the payments system is a fairly important increase in competition," he said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
HSBC Holdings Plc, Citicorp and Standard Chartered Plc are seen as the hungriest of the predators eyeing Australia's major banks now a ban on takeovers by foreigners has been lifted, analysts said on Thursday.
Treasurer Peter Costello announced on Wednesday the end of a former Labor government's blanket-ban on takeovers of Australia's four largest banks by foreigners.  
The weakest of the four majors, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Westpac Banking Corp, are considered the juiciest prey for the foreign banks.
"HSBC is regarded is as perhaps the number one predator," said ABN AMRO banking analyst Mike Pulman.
"After that Lloyds TSB or ABN AMRO or Citicorp or Deutche Bank are the most likely," Pulman said.
However analysts said HSBC was unlikely to be closely eyeing ANZ because of ANZ's strong presence in Asia through its Grindlays unit, which would simply create duplication.  
National Australia Bank Ltd, the strongest of the big four, is seen as the least likely of the takeover targets because of its hefty overseas assets and its sheer size.
"They (NAB) don't provide purely an Australian exposure and they carry some foreign assets which might not be attractive to a bidder, particularly if you're already in that market," said Shaw Stockbroking banking analyst Anusha Srinivasan.
NAB owns Britain's Yorkshire Bank and Clydesdale Bank, the National Irish Bank and Michigan National Corp.  
"ANZ carries with it the same sort of caveat, do you want exposure to this Asian distribution they've got?" Srinivasan said.
"ANZ argues it would be the least attractive to HSBC because of its Asian operations and the duplication aspect," Pulman said.
However, other analysts said ANZ's Asian connection may prove an attraction rather than a deterrent to those European and U.S. banks that don't have an Asian presence.  
Westpac, which does not have the same overseas assets, is therefore seen as the most likely of the weaker two banks to be taken over by a foreign bank. It is also seen most willing.
"Westpac is possibly the most likely, more because of the attitude of Westpac management which might be the most receptive to a bid," Pulman said.
Westpac's chief executive Bob Joss is an American seen more focused on maximising value for shareholders than keeping the bank Australian-owned.  
Standard Chartered Plc is seen first in line for Westpac, having already formed an alliance with Westpac to provide banking services to Westpac customers in Asia.
The recently privatised Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the final member of the big four, is the dark horse in the race, analysts said.
CBA is heavily exposed to the ultra-competitive home loan market, making it attractive to some who want a strong home loan book, but tarnishing it for others more interested in higher margin activities.  
But any budding foreign acquirer will have to move fast because the first takeover of a four major banks may well be the last to get through before the doors are slammed shut again, the analysts said.
Costello's announcement on the end to the foreign takeover ban went with the caveat that any large scale transfer of bank ownership to foreigners would not be allowed.
Costello did not say how many bank takeovers would be too many, but the official Wallis Financial Inquiry has said any more than one takeover would be a problem.  
"If that is correct, whoever makes their move from offshore is going to have to do it pretty smartly," Srinivasan said.
"If a takeover bid for one of the majors by a foreign bank is successful, then consequent bids might not be," she said.
If there was any doubt that Prime Minister John Howard's government is obsessed with keeping the "battlers" happy, then Treasurer Peter Costello wiped those out on Wednesday.
Costello could have simply given up his veto on big bank mergers, passing on any bank merger judgement to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) if, as he said, his primary concern was to make the banks more competitive.
The Wallis Inquiry, which Costello set up, recommended he do just that.
Instead he kept the veto and made up his own mind about how competitive the banks are now by telling the big four they could not merge until they become more competitive.
It's the ACCC's job to judge if a merger reduces competition and Costello is happy to let them pass jugdement in every other sector of the economy, so why not let ACCC Chairman Allan Fels decide on the banks?
The answer became clear when Costello was asked just this question in his news conference on Wednesday. Here's his reply.
"We are a government. We are elected. We are going to account to the Australian people and we have reserved to ourselves, at this stage, the decision that there will not be mergers between the four majors, and we have reserved to ourselves the decision to ensure that the Australian financial system still has healthy Australian ownership.
"We consider that a matter of public policy."
Costello's motivation becomes even clearer when you look at his reasoning for keeping a 'four pillars' policy.
"We do not have a competitive enough access for small business to financial services," he said.
"One of the things that we would be interested in seeing is new entrants, non-bank institutions, starting to develop widely used financial lending practices, in relation to small business."
For small business, read 'battlers'.
The same battlers John Howard has pledged to serve again and again since his election on March 3 last year.
Howard knows the battlers at least dislike the large banks and that they fear what the banks might do to bank fees and charges if they were allowed to get even more powerful.
Even the banks' own consumer surveys show they are very unpopular.
The last thing Howard wants is the ACCC telling him a bank merger is all right and being forced to swallow it.
The battlers, and therefore Howard, know better.
The prognosis for a change of heart is not good.
If the government cannot ignore the politics of bank mergers when it has a massive majority in the lower house, is two years out from the next scheduled election, and is in its first term of government, then when will it?
Some bank analysts expect a change of heart after the inevitable election win in 1999.
Don't bet on it while Costello and Howard are bowing to the battlers.
-- Canberra bureau 61-6 273-2730
Australia's largest home mortgage lender warned on Wednesday that a proposed change to Australia's system of prudential regulation could lead to huge collapses like those seen in the U.S. savings and loan system.
Commonwealth Bank of Australia Managing Director David Murray said proposals by a government-sponsored inquiry into the financial system to regulate banks, pension funds, insurers and other non-banks within the same prudential system was too risky.
Murray told an audience of bankers and economists the proposal would create a system similar to that which regulated the U.S. savings and loan sector before widespread collapses in the 1980s.
"These proposals do take us into uncharted waters which set up for Australia a savings and loans system that cost the citizens of the United States an awful lot of money," he said.
Murray's criticism of the plan to open up the banking payments system to greater competition and strip the Reserve Bank of Australia of its prudential supervision role is the first major attack on the official Wallis' report on the financial system since its release last week.
The conservative Liberal/National government, which set up the Wallis Inquiry soon after its election last year, is currently considering Wallis' recommendations and is expected to make its recommendations later this year.
Murray's broadside was immediately attacked by one of his audience at a Committee for Economic Development (CEDA) luncheon as emotive scare-mongering.
Replying to a question from the floor, Murray said he would not back away from his comments, adding a bank or fund failure was too was too dangerous to risk changing the current system.
He said the time was right to debate Wallis' plan and others should not shy away from being critical.
At the moment, the Reserve Bank requires banks and others with banking licences to meet strict prudential requirements on capital reserves and stops non-banks from issuing cheques or allowing them access to the overnight payments system.
The inquiry, headed by businessman Stan Wallis, recommended that non-banks such as pension funds, building societies and even telecommunications groups be allowed access to the payments system and be covered by a single new body called the Australian Prudential Regulation Commission.
"I would prefer that the Reserve Bank remain the prudential supervisor," Murray said.
Later, Murray rejected the claim that he was scaremongering.
"More Australians have chosen to bank with us than any other financial institution. We're probably better aware of what is scaremongering and what is proper community debate than anybody else," he told reporters after his luncheon address.
Commonwealth Bank which was government-owned until last year, has the largest number of retail savings and other accounts of all of Australia's banks.
"It's a matter of fact that the S&amp;L system in America cost their community A$110 billion (US$86 billion)," he said.
"Why should I therefore condone a supervisory system that appears to be built that way," he said.
"(Wallis) has deliberately overlaid a number of deposit-taking institutions into one supervisory system. That's what the American system did and they got the S&amp;L problem.
"I see that potential here and I hope that it doesn't happen," he said.
New Zealand-based investment group Brierley Investments Ltd on Tuesday called on the Australian government to relax its investment rules so that New Zealand companies are treated the same as Australian ones.
Brierley chairman Bob Matthew said Australia should change its rules to let New Zealand investment into Australia in the same way that trade between the trans-Tasman neighbours is now unhindered under the Closer Economic Relations agreement.  
"Certainly in the context of Australasia, there seems to be no merit whatsover in having one market for trade purposes and two distinct markets for investment," Matthew told Reuters in an interview.
"Australian business has had the benefit of entirely free investment environment in New Zealand and it's not possible to conceive an effective single market for trade when there's inhibitions as to where one can exploit capital," he said.
Brierley Investments has in the last two to three years made major investments in Australian groups.  
It has bought 28 percent of building materials group James Hardie Industries Ltd, 7.4 percent of retailer Coles Myer Ltd and 19.9 percent of publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
But this investment push, which sees the New Zealand-based Brierley now with A$1.8 billion invested in Australia and A$1.6 billion in New Zealand, has stalled this year as it came up against various rules restricting its investments.
Brierley was stopped from buying more of Fairfax by rules which force anyone holding more than 19.9 percent to make a full takeover bid or slowly increase their bid.  
Brierley would in any event be stopped from raising its stake any higher than 25 percent because of rules controlling foreign ownership in the media.
Foreigners are also stopped from buying more than 25 percent of telecommunications groups, which effectively stops Telecom Corp of New Zealand from taking a major role in Australia.
But Matthew said he was not overly hopeful the Australian government would kick its dependency on the "regulation habit", particularly when it had an uncooperative Senate.  
"I recognise that slender majorities tend to dampen achievement levels," he said.
Matthew said Australia should also drop its takeover rules and adopt those used in New Zealand which do not place the same restrictions on companies holding stakes over 19.9 percent.
Matthew, who is also Air New Zealand Ltd chairman, said he was optimistic that Australia would look at granting the airline further "beyond rights".
These rights allow Air New Zealand to stop over in Australia, pick up Australian customers and fly them to a third destination other than New Zealand.  
Australia's refusal to grant Air New Zealand further "beyond rights" has been a festering sore in diplomatic and business relations in the last two years.
Matthew said he expected the respective aviation ministers to meet again in May to discuss the issue.
"We consider it well and truly overdue," he said of the granting of the further rights.
Matthew also repeated comments by Brierley executive director Rod Price that Brierley had not spoken to Australian media mogul Kerry Packer about selling Brierley's Fairfax stake to Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd.  
"No. We aspire to be a long term and increasing shareholder in the Fairfax group," he said.
Packer has said he wants to increase his 11.8 percent stake if the government relaxes rules currently stopping television station owners from owning major newspapers at the same time.
The government is expected to ease these rules set up by the previous Labor government.
Brierley's shares closed unchanged at NZ$1.26 on Tuesday.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The Australian government ordered a Canadian television group to reduce its stake in an Australian television network on Friday, reflecting a strengthening in Canberra's opposition to more foreign ownership of local media.
Treasurer Peter Costello ruled that Canwest Global Communications Corp, controlled by Canadian Izzy Asper, must cut its stake in the Ten television network back to its previous 57.5 percent level from its current 76 percent.
Canwest raised its stake earlier this year through associated local companies, but a government authority said the increased ownership broke foreign control rules.
Costello's ruling came as Prime Minister John Howard, in his clearest statement yet, said he did not want foreign investment in the Australian media to go any higher.
"In the media for example, which is in the news at the moment, we've made it clear we don't want foreign investment to go any higher," Howard said in a radio interview after meetings with major media owners in recent weeks.
The government is reviewing cross-media ownership rules set by the former Labor government which stop television station proprietors from owning a major newspaper in the same city or vice versa.
The government is expected to drop these cross-media ownership rules, allowing local television and magazine mogul Kerry Packer to launch a takeover bid for newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
Howard also said a proposal by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd to increase its Australian television holdings had collapsed because Murdoch would not give up some of his newspapers to leave his total media holdings unchanged.
But Howard's determination to block foreign investors like Izzy Asper has unleashed a fierce debate about whether he was favouring Packer in his review of media laws.
Another of Australia's major media owners, Seven Network Ltd chairman Kerry Stokes, accused Howard of having done a "disgraceful" deal to deliver Fairfax to Packer.
Some commentators have said Packer's support for Howard ahead of last year's election has been a factor in Howard's opposition to the cross-media rules, which he says are outdated.
"For the Prime Minister to play king-maker revisits the darkest days of the Labor Party's deal-making with its mates," Stokes told Reuters.
Labor Prime Minister Bob Hawke was seen as close to Packer during the 1980s, before his successor Paul Keating fell out with Packer ahead of his 1996 election rout.
"He (Howard) has made a commitment...done a deal with Packer. There's no other reason for the change," Stokes said, commenting on an Australian Financial Review article which said Howard planned to arrange for Murdoch to support a Packer takeover of Fairfax.
A clearly stung Howard rejected Stokes' claim.
"I reject completely any suggestion of a deal as a silly, erroneous and quite dishonourable claim," Howard told a news conference in Sydney.
"I'm on the record over a period of 10 years as being opposed to the cross-media restrictions," Howard said, pointing out his views preceded Packer's support for him in 1996.
Seven Network Ltd chairman Kerry Stokes attacked Prime Minister John Howard on Friday, accusing him of having done a "disgraceful" deal to deliver newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd to billionaire Kerry Packer.
Stokes told Reuters in an interview Howard had no right to negotiate any deal on Seven's ownership as part of a larger plan to ensure a Packer takeover of Fairfax.
"Who the hell does the Prime Minister think he's representing?", Stokes said.  
"For the Prime Minister to play king-maker revisits the darkest days of the Labor Party's deal-making with its mates," he said.
Earlier on Friday the Australian Financial Review newspaper reported Howard had offered to do a deal with Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd whereby News would be allowed to raise its stake in the Seven Network if News supported an easing of cross-media rules to allow a Packer takeover of Fairfax.
The Financial Review said Howard's plan fell through last week when News rejected one part of it which would have seen News sell some of its Australian newspapers to a new owner.  
Stokes said the reported deal showed Howard had done a deal with Packer.
"He has made a commitment ... done a deal with Packer. There's no other reason for the change," Stokes said.
"It's obviously to deliver Fairfax to Packer," he said.
"It shows a disgraceful disregard for the public interest."
Stokes said such a deal meant the public would be robbed of an opportunity to have a say on media policy in Australia.
Stokes' Australian Capital Equities currently owns 26 percent of Seven while News owns about 14 percent.  
News, which is classified as a foreign shareholder because of Murdoch's U.S. citizenship, cannot own more than 15 percent of Seven under current foreign ownership rules.
Howard would have to grant an exemption.
The conservative Liberal-National government is currently reviewing the cross-media rules set up by the former Labor government prevent television station owners from owning a major newspaper in the same city or vice versa.
These rules stop Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd increasing its 12 percent Fairfax stake beyond 15 percent while it owns the top-rating Nine television network.  
The government is widely expected to drop the cross-media rules, allowing Packer to launch a takeover bid for Fairfax, which publishes the Sydney Morning Herald, The Australian Financial Review and The Age newspapers.
Some commentators have said the government's decision to drop the cross-media rules had come after Packer endorsed Howard in a television interview before the 1996 election campaign.
The Financial Review report earlier on Friday said Howard had attempted to arrange the deal so as to mute mounting criticism about a lack of media diversity should Packer take over Fairfax.  
Packer was forced to withdraw from a consortium bidding for Fairfax in the the early 1990s after a public outcry led by former Prime Ministers Gough Whitlam and Malcolm Fraser.
Prime Minister Howard was not available to respond to Stokes specific comments, but his office said earlier comments made by Howard rejecting accusations of such a deal still stood.
Howard said late on Thursday he had opposed the cross-media rules for a long time and his views had nothing to do with Packer's support for him in the election campaign.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Local billionaire Kerry Packer faces an uphill battle to overcome political opposition and a high asking price if he wants to take over Australia's oldest publisher, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
Speculation has simmered for months that Australia's biggest television station owner will launch a takeover bid for Fairfax as soon as the government eased cross-media rules set up by the former Labor government.
Comments by Prime Minister John Howard last week that Fairfax needed an owner like Packer fanned that speculation into talk of an imminent easing of the rules and an inevitably successful takeover bid.
Analysts said on Tuesday however that a successful Packer bid for Fairfax, which publishes three of Australia's most profitable daily newspapers, was not such a sure thing.
Growing political opposition from within Howard's conservative Liberal-National coalition and a hostile Senate have made any Howard plan look more fragile.
"There's a few more hurdles to overcome yet," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett senior media analyst Vince Pepe.
"Getting (Prime Minister John) Howard to introduce legislation is one thing, but getting it through parliament while keeping his backbench appeased is another thing," Pepe said.
"The amount of political fallout that's beginning might see him wondering whether it is such a clever thing after all."
Howard's cabinet was considering on Tuesday changes to the cross-media rules that stop television station owners like Packer from buying a major newspaper group like Fairfax.
Howard has already said the rules are outdated and his government is widely expected to drop them, allowing Packer to use his current 15 percent stake as a beachhead for a full scrip-based takeover bid.
But Howard's position has come under increasing fire in recent days after Seven Network Ltd Chairman Kerry Stokes accused Howard of having done what he called a disgraceful deal with Packer that would concetrate media ownership into the hands of just two men.
A successful Packer takeover of Fairfax would mean Australia's major newspapers would be divided between Packer and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.
A controversial independent senator, Mal Colston, threw up another roadblock in front of any media law changes earlier on Tuesday, threatening to vote against the government.
The fine balance in the Senate means if Colston votes against the government, the balance of power transfers to the left-leaning Democrat and Green senators, who have said they oppose any further concentration of media ownership.
Analysts also said Packer may baulk at having to pay the A$3.0 billion (US$2.35 billion) needed to convince some large entrenched shareholders to bail out Fairfax.
Packer may also struggle to convince his fellow shareholders in the bid vehicle, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, to swallow the earnings dilution such a bid would create.
"Despite Packer's apparent obsession for Fairfax, he's not going to pay a stupid price for it and some people in the market are expecting a stupid price," said another analyst.
"I'd be a pretty disappointed PBL shareholder if he was prepared to pay more than A$3.40 (a share) for it," the analyst said, adding that a A$3.40 price would be earnings dilutive given Fairfax's forecast earnings. Fairfax's shares closed down two cents at A$3.23 on Tuesday.
(A$ = US$0.78)
A successful bid by local billionaire Kerry Packer for publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd is not the sure thing many market players and media commentators believe, analysts said on Tuesday.
Before Packer can launch a bid for Fairfax, the government would have to first decide to drop the current cross-media rules and then pass any legislation through a hostile senate.  
Packer would then have to offer a takeover premium on top of an already high Fairfax share price that was both tempting to existing shareholders and not too dilutive for Packer's fellow Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd shareholders.
"There's a few more hurdles to overcome yet," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett senior media analyst Vince Pepe.
"Getting (Prime Minister John) Howard to introduce legislation is one thing, but getting it through parliament while keeping his backbench appeased is another thing," Pepe said.  
"The amount of political fallout that's beginning might see him wondering whether it is such a clever thing after all," he said.
Howard's cabinet was considering on Tuesday changes to the cross media rules set by the former Labor government that stop television station owners like Packer from buying a major newspaper group like Fairfax.
Howard has already said the rules are outdated and his government is widely expected to drop them, allowing Packer to use his current 15 percent stake as a beachhead for a full scrip-based takeover bid.  
But Howard's position has come under increasing fire in recent days after Seven Network Ltd Chairman Kerry Stokes accused Howard of having done what he called a disgraceful deal with Packer and of playing king-maker.
Former conservative Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser wrote to Howard on Monday, calling on him not to lessen media diversity and Fairfax journalists went on strike on Tuesday morning to protest any government move to drop cross-media rules.
A successful Packer takeover of Fairfax would mean Australia's major newspapers would be divided between Packer and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.  
Government back-benchers have also written to Howard expressing their concern about the way changes are being considered.
Controversial independent senator Mal Colston threw up another roadblock in front of any media law changes earlier on Tuesday, threatening to vote against the government.
The fine balance in the senate means if Colston votes against the government, the balance of power transfers to the left-leaning Democrat and Green senators, who have said they oppose any further concentration of media ownership.  
"All the arrows are pointing in the right direction (for a takeover), but I wouldn't say it's a fait accompli," said a senior media analyst.
"It's (cross-media reform) got to get through the senate and the price has got to be reasonable," the analyst said.
Packer and PBL, which would be the vehicle for the scrip-based bid that Packer foreshadowed last year, would have to pay the equivalent of at least A$3.50 for each Fairfax share, analysts said. Fairfax's shares were unchanged at A$3.25 at 1.30 p.m. (0330 GMT).  
That price may prove too painful for Packer and his fellow shareholders, who would be concerned about earnings dilution and would have to approve any deal, analysts said.
"Despite Packer's apparent obsession for Fairfax, he's not going to pay a stupid price for it and some people in the market are expecting a stupid price," said a Sydney media analyst.
"I'd be a pretty disappointed PBL shareholder if he was prepared to pay more than A$3.40 for it," the analyst said, adding that a A$3.40 price would be earnings dilutive given Fairfax's forecast earnings.
"At A$3.50 to A$3.60 it becomes pretty savagely dilutive."  
Analysts said the final roadblock to a successful Packer bid would be dislodging major Fairfax shareholders Brierley Investments Ltd, with about 20 percent, and Bankers Trust Australia with about 13 percent.
Brierley in particular has said often and loudly that it is a long term shareholder with ambitions of its own to take a higher stake and has in recent years held onto its investments for long periods. Packer may also have competition.  
The Australian newspaper reported earlier on Tuesday that British publisher Pearson Plc was part of consortium called Australian Independent Newspapers (AIN) that was considering bidding for all or part of Fairfax.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australia's Westpac Banking Corp, struggling like its fellow major banks to cope with a savage interest margin squeeze, surprised analysts on Wednesday by posting a strong profit rise in the first half year.
Higher income from bank account and transaction fees and a series of property sale profits more than offset the squeeze on home lending margins, boosting net profit for the six months to March 31 by 12.9 percent to A$638 million (US$496 million).
Westpac increased its interim dividend to 19 cents from 16 cents after earnings per share (EPS) rose to 34.4 cents from 29.2 cents. The EPS rise was helped by a share buy-back.
Analysts had expected a profit of about A$610 million after Westpac warned late last year about the margin squeeze and foreshadowed flat profits.
The market however had in recent weeks has taken a more optimistic view of the likely profit result than the analysts, boosting Westpac's share price 16 percent in the last month.
"That's why the stock hasn't bounced as much as you'd expect it to," Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney said.
Westpac's shares closed down five cents at A$7.45 after a rise straight after the result to A$7.60.
Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss welcomed the profit rise as a solid result, but said it would be difficult to repeat the 12.9 percent rise in the second half because of what he said was a tremendous squeeze on lending margins.
"I think that it will be very hard to do in the second half given the margin pressures that we're seeing through all parts of our product range," Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss told a news conference.
Joss said however he expected the full year profit for the year to September 30 would be higher than the A$1.132 billion posted in 1995/96.
Australia's major banks have been forced in the last year to cut about 150 basis points off their home lending margins by red hot competition from non-banks that are funded by mortgage origination. These mortgage originators have snared about 10 to 12 percent of the Australian market in the last three years.
Westpac's group net interest margin fell to 3.55 percent in the six months to March 31 from 3.75 percent in the six months to September, which cost Westpac about A$88 million in the half.
Westpac's increases in bank fees and charges had not fully offset the effect of this margin squeeze, Joss said. Westpac's accounts showed Westpac's account keeping and transaction fee income rose to A$379 million from A$306 million a year earlier.
"There's constant pressure on margins so there's a test to do the best we can on fees, on lowering costs and increasing efficiencies," Joss said.
(A$ = US$0.7775)
A 22 percent rise in fee and other non-interest income boosted Westpac Banking Corp Ltd to a surprisingly strong first half profit result on Wednesday, more than offsetting the effect of a squeeze on interest margins.
Westpac announced a net profit of A$638 million for the six months to March 31, up from A$565 million in the same period a year earlier.  
Analysts said this was about A$20 million to A$30 million above their expectations, but had not shocked those in the market who had pushed Westpac's share price higher in recent weeks in anticipation of very strong result.
"That's why the stock hasn't bounced as much as you'd expect it to," Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney said.
Westpac's shares were down five cents at A$7.45 at 3.40 p.m. (0540 GMT), having earlier jumped to a A$7.60 high.  
The profit jump was due largely to non-interest income rising to A$869 million from A$714 million, underpinned by rising account fees and some profits from the sale of property and closed branches.
The boost from fees more than offset sluggish growth in interest income as Westpac, like Australia's other major banks, battled a 150 basis point squeeze in home lending margins.
Westpac's group net interest margin fell to 3.55 percent in the six months to March 31 from 3.75 percent in the six months to September.  
Non-bank competitors funded by mortgage origination have snared more than 10 percent of the home mortgage market in the past three years, forcing banks to cut their home loan margins by about 150 basis points to about 100 to 150 basis points.
"Features of the first half financial results were non-interest expense control, continued improvement in asset quality, improved staff productivity, and higher non-interest income reflecting: growth in commissions and fees, higher financial markets income and benefits from the sale of equity investments," Westpac managing director Bob Joss said in a statement.  
"These results were achieved against a background of reduced interest margins and continued investments in strategic capabilities designed to enhance future prospects," Joss said.
Westpac's net interest income fell to A$1.695 billion in the six months ended March 31 from A$1.705 billion in the six months to September 30 last year, but was up on the A$1.549 billion in the year-ago period.
Income from fees and commissions rose to A$592 million from A$532 million in the year-ago first half.
Other income, which included the sale of equity investments, rose to A$142 million from A$68 million a year earlier.  
Westpac also announced it planned to raise up to A$500 million through a preference share issue after its merger with Bank of Melbourne Ltd.
Westpac said it would issue up to 20 million non-cumulative converting preference share at an issue price of A$25 each. The money raised would be used to fund the cash component under the Bank of Melbourne merger scheme, it said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australia's anti-monopolies watchdog, examining claims of collusion against the four major banks, has asked them to explain why they all cut their mortgage rates by the same amount within hours of each other.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) Chairman Allan Fels said it was unusual that the banks would all move so quickly to cut their rates by the same amount.
"We don't claim to have evidence of collusion. What we are doing is seeking an explanation from the banks," Fels said in a radio interview broadcast on Monday.
National Australia Bank, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, Commonwealth Bank of Australia and Westpac Banking Corp all cut their standard variable mortgage rates by 0.35 percent to 7.2 percent on Friday, hours after the Reserve Bank cut official rates by 0.5 percent to 5.5 percent.
Government and opposition politicians and consumer groups have since suggested the banks colluded to ensure they did not pass all of the official rate cut on to their customers.
Fels said the commission would ask for details of any communications between the banks on Friday and whether there had been any previous discussion about their approach to possible official rate cuts.
"The reason why we're seeking an explanation from the banks is that it is unusual for them all to have moved so quickly within a few hours of one and other and to have reduced their rates by the same limited amount of 0.35 (points) as against a Reserve Bank reduction of 0.5," Fels said.
"Occasionally, one player will do something a bit different," Fels said.
"But in this case the four big players, all of them, moved by exactly the same amount, despite having told so many of us over time that their circumstances, their costs and their strategies all differ."
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the first big bank to cut mortgage rates after Friday's official rate cut, denied on Monday that it had colluded with the other major banks.
"I haven't discussed interest rates with the other banks," CBA Managing Director David Murray said.
"We have a very careful discipline within the bank, because we don't believe in collusion, we believe in competition," Murray said, adding he would cooperate fully with the ACCC.
Australian Prime Minister John Howard on Friday questioned the level of competition amoung the banks.
"It is pretty hard to believe we have a highly competitive banking system at the present time when there can be delays of the kind that we are apparently about to witness in the passing on in the reduction in official interest rates," Howard said.
Opposition politicians also criticised the banks, who have also come under heavy public fire this year for increasing bank fees to offset a squeeze on home lending margins.
Opposition Treasury spokesman Gareth Evans said it was hard to believe the banks were not colluding on rates. "It's a little like a line of chorus girls, all with impeccable timing raising their leg exactly so high," Evans told reporters.
Australia's largest banks, under increasing political pressure to pass on all of an official interest rate cut to their customers, hit back on Wednesday at government comments they described as "bank-bashing."
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) chief executive Don Mercer said government criticism of the major banks in general was unfair and irresponsible.
"I'm very, very disappointed with this bank-bashing," Mercer told a news conference where he had just announced an 18-percent rise in ANZ's first-half net profits.
"I'm tired of it," he said.
Mercer said the Australia's major banks had cut variable mortgage rates by 330 basis points since the middle of last year while official rates had been cut by only 200 basis points.
"We have passed on more than the reductions in the cash rate," Mercer said. "It really isn't fair."
Mercer said banks had become easy targets for politicians wanting to earn easy political support.
"We're a free kick. Any time a politician wants a free kick, they just bash the banks. You can't lose," Mercer said.
The four major banks cut their variable mortgage rates by 35 basis points on Friday after the Reserve Bank's 50 basis point cut in official interest rates, sparking a round of criticism from government and consumer groups who claimed the banks had taken the opportunity to bolster their profits.
Australia's anti-monopoly watchdog is investigating allegations of collusion between the big four.
Treasurer Peter Costello, Prime Minister John Howard and various opposition politicians have attacked most of the banks' decision not to pass on all of the latest cut.
Costello again on Wednesday accused the major banks of profiting at the expense of consumers.
"The rate cuts were for consumers. That cut (on Friday) was not done for the benefit of the banks," Costello said in a radio interview on Wednesday.
"It wasn't done so that the banks could do a bit of price taking along the way," he said.
Costello went on to recommend consumers shift to those smaller banks and non-banks which had passed on all of the cut.
Ironically, Mercer's comments came after Costello praised ANZ's decision on Monday to again lower its standard variable rate. ANZ has now cut its key mortgage rate to 6.99 percent from the 7.55 percent before Friday's official rate cut.
None of the other three major bank have followed the ANZ.
"The ANZ is now the most competitive bank on home rates of the majors," Costello said.
Mercer was later joined by fellow major Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) in hitting back at Costello's comment.
CBA released a statement challenging what it said were "uninformed comments" and a "misapprehension".
CBA also took out full-page advertisments in national newspapers advising Costello to take out CBA's no-frills home loan, which has a 6.7 percent rate.
"If you really want to save on a home loan Mr Costello, we'll tell you where to go," the advertisment read.
Macquarie Bank Ltd, Australia's largest locally-owned investment bank, posted a stronger than expected annual profit on Monday, citing bullish investment markets and a steady flow of corporate advisory work as the driving factors.
Macquarie's net profit for the year to March 31 jumped 25.4 percent to A$116.94 million (US$88.87 million), producing a return on average shareholder funds or equity of 25.2 percent.
Macquarie raised its annual dividend to 43 cents from 36 cents a year earlier on an earnings per share rise to 74.9 cents a share from 61 cents a share.
Analysts had forecast a net profit of around A$105 million.
"All five major business groups performed well," Macquarie Bank managing director Allan Moss told a news conference.
"We were assisted by favourable market conditions, with a good level of corporate activity and fairly strong security markets," he said.
The Australian stock market rose 8.7 percent over the year to March 31 and ten year bond yields fell to 8.16 percent from 8.81 percent.
Macquarie's Corporate Advisory division, which advises companies on takeovers and mergers, benefitted from an active year of corporate plays and had 130 advisory mandates, up significantly from 1995/96.
Among others, Macquarie advised Placer Dome Inc on its takeover of Highlands Gold Ltd and TNT on its response to Dutch postal and telecoms group KPN NV's takeover bid.
However, Macquarie's advisory work with TNT produced the bank's one major hiccup for the year.
One of Macquarie's most senior corporate advisory executives, Simon Hannes, was charged with insider trading last month after he allegedly bought TNT options before KPN's takeover bid and made a notional profit of A$2 million.
Hannes, who was not working on the TNT project, allegedly had access to TNT documents at Macquarie. His lawyers have said he would be pleading not guilty.
Moss said the Hannes matter had not affected corporate advisory work and was not expected to in the current year.
"Our perception is that flow of business was unaffected by the Hannes matter, because our clients recognise this matter relates to an individual and not the bank as a whole," Moss said.
Meanwhile, Moss and analysts said the outlook for Macquarie was as bullish as that for the market overall, due in large part to low interest rates.
"With interest rates continuing to be low and perhaps going down a little bit further, there's every prospect for a reasonably good year in equity markets and we're also seeing quite a good flow in corporate activity," he said.
Australian stocks have risen another eight percent since balance date, while bond markets have also strengthened further.
Analysts said the result was stronger than expected.
"It's all looking fairly healthy, given the outlook for the market in general," said one Sydney analyst, who had forecast a A$110 million profit.
Investors welcomed the result and talk of an eventual capital return, boosting its stock four cents to A$9.50 at the close, near its A$9.60 all-time high.
Moss said an expected change to the way Macquarie's capital adequacy ratio was calculated was likely to boost its ratio to 16 percent in coming years from its current 13.2 percent, raising the possibility of a capital return through a share buy back or higher dividend payout ratio.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
Australia's largest locally-owned investment bank posted a stronger than expected annual profit on Monday, citing bullish investment markets and steady flow of corporate advisory work as the driving factors.
Macquarie Bank Ltd's net profit for the year to March 31 rose 25.4 percent to A$116.94 million, producing a return on average shareholder funds or equity of 25.2 percent.
Macquarie raised its annual dividend to 43 cents from 36 cents a year earlier on an earnings per share rise to 74.9 cents per share from 61 cents per share.  
Analysts had forecast a net profit of around A$105 million.
"All five major business groups performed well," Macquarie Bank Managing Director Allan Moss told a news conference.
"We were assisted by by favourable market conditions, with a good level of corporate activity and fairly strong security markets," he said.
The Australian stock market rose 8.7 percent over the year to March 31 and 10 year bond yields fell to 8.16 percent from 8.81 percent.  
Macquarie's Corporate Advisory division, which advises companies on takeovers and mergers, benefitted from an active year of corporate plays and had 130 advisory mandates, up significantly from 1995/96.
Among others, Macquarie advised Placer Dome Inc on its takeover of Highlands Gold Ltd and TNT on its response to a bid by Dutch postal and telecoms group KPN NV.
However, Macquarie's advisory work with TNT produced the bank's one major hiccup for the year.  
One of Macquarie's most senior corporate advisory executives, Simon Hannes, was charged with insider trading last month after he allegedly bought TNT options before KPN's takeover bid and made a notional profit of A$2 million.
Hannes, who was not working on the TNT project, allegedly had access to TNT documents at Macquarie.
His lawyers have said he would be pleading not guilty.
Moss said the Hannes matter had not affected corporate advisory work and was not expected to in the current year.  
"Our perception is that flow of business was unaffected by the Hannes matter, because our clients recognise this matter relates to an individual and not the bank as a whole," he said.
Meanwhile, Moss and analysts said the outlook for Macquarie was as bullish as that for the market overall, due in large part to low interest rates.
"With interest rates continuing to be low and perhaps going down a little bit further, there's every prospect for a reasonably good year in equity markets and we're also seeing quite a good flow in corporate activity," he said.  
Australian stocks have risen another eight percent since balance date, while bond markets have also strengthened further.
Analysts said the result was stronger than expected. "It's all looking fairly healthy, given the outlook for the market in general," said a Sydney analyst who had forecast A$110 million.
Investors welcomed the result and talk of an eventual capital return, boosting Macquarie's stock four cents to A$9.50 at the close, near its A$9.60 all-time high.  
Moss said an expected change to the way Macquarie's capital adequacy ratio was calculated was likely to boost its ratio to 16 percent in coming years from its current 13.2 percent, raising the possibility of a capital return through a share buy back or higher dividend payout ratio.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
The Sydney 2000 Olympics does not appear to be generating the economic bonanza many had hoped for and will not boost Sydney house prices, two construction and real estate forecasters said on Tuesday.
"The impact of the Olympics hasn't been as great as we'd been led to believe," Knight Frank Independent director Philip Ragan told a Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) seminar.
Construction of the games facilities and preparations for the games were in full swing, but were not yet adding significantly to the economy, Ragan said.
In 1993, when the Sydney was awarded the games, analysts forecast that the extra construction, tourism and jobs generated by the games would cumulatively add A$7 billion (US$5.3 billion) to A$8 billion to gross domestic product by 2001.
Ragan said the cumulative economic effect was likely to be closer to A$3 billion because of cost over-runs, lower revenue projections and the leakage of sponsorship revenues offshore.
"The outcome is coming in at the low end of expectations, in fact, significantly lower," Ragan said.
Olympics-related job creation had originally been estimated at about 150,000, but only 800 specific jobs had been created so far and only about 2,800 temporary jobs were seen in 2000, he said.
The state government and various private consortia are expected to spend about A$3.2 billion building new facilities.
But Ragan said this amount spent over four years was not a major increase on the A$10 billion spent each year on such construction in Sydney.
An expected nine percent rise in state government revenues and a trend towards higher savings would also swamp the Olympic-led boost to the local economy, he said.
"The effect of the Olympics is being more than overshadowed by other changes happening in the economy," he said.
BIS Schrapnel building and construction director Robert Mellor said he expected Sydney property prices to rise almost 40 percent in the lead up to the year 2000 and then slide in the years immediately after the Olympics.
But Mellor said this would have happened regardless of Sydney having the Olympics.
"It's got nothing to do with the Olympics. I don't see it having any effect," Mellor told the CEDA seminar.
"The positives may not be as great as the econometric models may indicate," he said.
The Atlanta Olympics had shown retailers and street traders had not done nearly as well as expected, Mellor said.
He pointed to the recent rash of legal actions by Atlanta's Olympic vendors against organisers for promising unrealistic likely incomes.
Those residential areas very close to the games site at Homebush Bay in Sydney's Western Suburbs may benefit from the new recreational facilities built there, but the bulk of Sydney's housing market would not notice.
He said the prospect of some home owners being able to rent out their homes for A$1,000 or A$2,000 for two weeks was unlikely to provide a general boost to the market.
"It just doesn't change the fundamental reason for buying a house in Sydney," he said.
(A$=US$0.7590)
Australian-based soft drink bottler Coca-Cola Amatil Ltd (CCA) announced on Wednesday it had settled the final details of its share swap deal with San Miguel Corp of the Philippines to create the world's second largest Coca-Cola bottler.
CCA originally announced the deal in April, but was forced to look again at its details after some San Miguel shareholders protested that San Miguel would not have enough boardroom influence and had given away strong cashflows too cheaply.
CCA said on Wednesday the initial terms of the deal had been confirmed, with CCA buying San Miguel's stake in a soft drink bottling joint venture in the Philippines in exchange for issuing San Miguel a 25 percent stake in CCA.
CCA's parent group, The Coca-Cola Co, which had owned 30 percent of the joint venture with San Miguel, will have its shareholding in CCA diluted to 33 percent from 36 percent.
The A$3.7 billion (US$2.8 billion) deal creates a company with annual sales of almost A$4 billion, production of over one billion cases of soft drink and profits of almost A$300 million.
But CCA said the number of San Miguel represenatives on the CCA board would be increased to four from the initially agreed three, helping to allay some San Miguel shareholder concerns.
"This development will broaden and deepen the pool of experience and advice available to management and shareholders as CCA expands its business both in the Philippines and world-wide," CCA chairman Dean Wills said in a statement.
CCA shareholders welcomed the confirmation of the deal, initially bumping CCA's shares up 62 cents or about four percent to a new 1997 high of A$16.02 as lingering concerns about a renegotiation were wiped away.
CCA however eased back to A$15.85 near the close after some profit-taking and some analysts' comments that the deal's confirmation was no surprise.
"The deal to all intents and purposes was done. The only fiddling was at the margins," said one Sydney analyst who asked not to be named. "It just means they're going to have to build a very big board table," the analyst said.
Initial news of the deal in March pulled CCA's share price out of a five month 40 percent slump brought on by a profit downgrade.
"It buys them time and strengthens their cash flow," said another Sydney analyst.
Investors in the Philippines were however less impressed.
San Miguel's A shares were down a full peso at 49 pesos in late trade as Philippines investors digested the news that San Miguel would not get a higher proportion of CCA.
"It is good news but in terms of bottom line, San Miguel did not get an additional stake, just an additional vote," said Noel Reyes, research head at Anscor-Hagedorn Securities.
"The impact is not that positive. They have just given up control of a major cash cow, it is as simple as that," said Helen Alvarez, research director at All Asia Securities.
The deal will be put to put to CCA shareholders within the next month for formal approval.
CCA already operates 43 bottling plants in 17 countries in Australasia, Asia and Eastern Europe and will be second only to its Coca Cola Co parent as a Coca Cola producer.
(A$ = US$0.76)
Australian-based soft drink bottler Coca-Cola Amatil (CCA) Ltd announced on Wednesday it had settled the final details of its share swap deal with San Miguel Corp to create the world's second largest Coca-Cola bottler.
CCA announced the deal in April but was forced to look again at its details after some San Miguel shareholders protested that San Miguel would not have enough board-room influence and had given away strong cashflows too cheaply.  
CCA said on Wednesday the initial terms of the deal had been confirmed, with CCA buying San Miguel's stake in a soft drink bottling joint venture in the Philippines in exchange for issuing San Miguel a 25 percent stake in CCA.
CCA's parent group The Coca-Cola Co, which had owned 30 percent of the joint venture with San Miguel, will have its shareholding in CCA diluted to 33 percent from 36 percent.
The A$3.7 billion deal creates a company with annual sales of almost A$4 billion, production of over one billion cases of soft drink and profits of almost A$300 million.  
But CCA said the number of San Miguel represenatives on the CCA board would be increased to four from the initially agreed three, helping to allay some San Miguel shareholder concerns.
"This development will broaden and deepen the pool of experience and advice available to management and shareholders as CCA expands its business both in the Philippines and world-wide," CCA chairman Dean Wills said in a statement.
CCA shareholders welcomed the confirmation of the deal, initially bumping CCA's shares up 62 cents or about four percent to a new 1997 high of A$16.02 as lingering concerns about a renegotiation were wiped away.  
CCA however eased back to A$15.85 near the close after some profit-taking and some analysts' comments that the deal's confirmation was no surprise.
"The deal to all intents and purposes was done. The only fiddling was at the margins," said a Sydney analyst who asked not to be identified. "It just means they're going to have to build a very big board table," the analyst said.
Initial news of the deal in March pulled CCA's share price out of a five month-40 percent slump brought on by a profit downgrade. "It buys them time and strengthens their cash flow," said another Sydney analyst.  
Investors in the Philippines were however less impressed.
San Miguel's A shares were down a full peso at 49 pesos in late trade as Philippines digested the news that San Miguel would not get a higher proportion of CCA.
"It is good news but in terms of bottom line, San Miguel did not get an additional stake, just an additional vote," said Noel Reyes, research head at Anscor-Hagedorn Securities.
"The impact is not that positive. They have just given up control of a major cash cow, it is as simple as that," said Helen Alvarez, research director at All Asia Securities.  
The deal will be put to put to CCA shareholders within the next month for formal approval.
CCA already operates 43 bottling plants in 17 countries in Australasia, Asia and Eastern Europe and will be second only to its The Coca Cola Co parent as a Coca-Cola producer.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australasian-based building products group James Hardie Industries Ltd posted weaker annual profits on Wednesday, but forecast its expanding U.S. fibre cement and gypsum units would drive a profit surge in 1997/98.
"For the first time in several years we have the production capacity to meet U.S. market demand," James Hardie managing director Keith Barton said.
"If current trading conditions prevail, we expect very strong growth in (U.S.) sales and earnings to continue in the year ahead," Barton told a briefing for analysts and reporters.
"(Group) operating profit after tax for the current year will improve significantly compared to the past year," he said.
James Hardie's net profit jumped to A$83 million (US$63 million) in the year to March 31 from A$32.2 million in 1995/96, but this was due largely to a A$31.7 million abnormal profit from asset sales.
Profit before abnormals fell 12.3 percent to A$51.3 million because of sharply lower Australasian buliding materials profits and this was in line with expectations.
But Barton's comments at the briefing about continuing weakness in the Australian and New Zealand building materials markets prompted some analysts to downgrade their forecasts for the 1997/98 year.
James Hardies' Australian operations, hit by a 12 percent fall in home construction, slumped to a A$800,000 pre-tax loss in 1996/97 from a A$33.8 million profit in 1995/96.
New Zealand profits fell eight percent to A$31.9 million.
Barton said competition in Australia and New Zealand remained intense and would continue to slice away at sales, margins and profits in 1997/98.
"The modest recovery in Australian housing construction will not be sufficient to offset the impact of growing competition on our Australian fibre cement business," Barton said.
Increased imports would pressure margins and volumes in New Zealand, he said.
Barton also told the analysts briefing that new competition coming on stream in the United States and James Hardie's drive to increase market share there would pressure prices down.
"We may have to discount ... be more aggressive against engineered wood products and against PVC," he said.
"But that doesn't necessarily mean a reduction in margins," he said, adding sales volumes would continue to grow and economies of scale were still to be obtained, Barton said.
Some analysts said Barton's comments about Australasian weakness and U.S. price pressure would force them to downgrade their 1997/98 pre-abnormal profit forecasts to about A$80 million to A$85 million from A$90 million to A$90 million before the results.
ABN AMRO Hoare Govett building materials analyst Fabian Babich said he would keep his 1997/98 forecast at A$80 million.
Hardie kept its final dividend for 1996/97 unchanged at 6.5 cents per share, taking full year dividends to an unchanged 13.0 cents per share.
Hardie is about 28 percent owned by Brierley Investments Ltd.
Hardie's shares closed down 15 cents at A$4.05.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
Brokers Were Stockbroking and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett had placed all of The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd's 616.6 million Foster's Brewing Group Ltd shares with institutions and private clients by early on Friday, Were said.
Retail investors bought about A$150 million of the A$1.535 billion package of shares, with about 55 percent of the remainder being sold to overseas institutional investors and about 45 percent sold to local institutions, Were Stockbroking managing director John Paterson said.  
Paterson pointed to a A$2.5 billion-equivalent placement of three percent of The British Petroleum Co Plc shares in May as possibly the largest such placement this year.
The Kuwait Investment Office sold three percent or 170 million of BP's shares through Goldman Sachs in mid-May this year for about 7.0 stg per share.
Paterson said the two brokers began placing the stock at about 3.30 p.m. (0530 GMT) on Thursday after Foster's announced the buy-back of 13.0 percent of its capital from Asahi Breweries Ltd and BHP's placement of 616.6 million Foster's shares. The buy-back and placement were at A$2.49 per share.  
Were and ABN AMRO's Australian offices worked until very late on Thursday night before handing it over to their New York and European offices.
Paterson said the buy-back was completed at about 9.00 a.m. (2330 GMT).
"We had strong institutional support in Australia, similarly in London and Europe, particularly London, and in the United States," Paterson said.
Private client support from Were's New Zealand and Australian clients was also strong, he said.  
"The other satisfying fact is you tend to assume after one of these deals that you've exhausted the demand in the market place, but with the stock trading up at A$2.55 against the placement price of A$2.49, it says there's still quite a lot of untapped demand out there," he said.
Foster's shares were down five cents at A$2.55 at 1.40 p.m. (0340 GMT) on 675 million shares put through the market.
Foster's said on Thursday it expected foreign investors to hold about a third of its shares after the reconstruction.  
Foster's said BHP had agreed to limit individual investors to parcels of no more than five percent of BHP's Foster's shares.
Paterson said the successful completion of the deal was satisfying for Were and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett and they were now looking forward to a rest.
"I won't mind having a three day weekend," he said.
Monday is the Queen's Birthday holiday in Australia.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
