The Commmonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) warned again on Tuesday of a subdued profit outlook for the current 1996/97 year and beyond, citing a competitive housing market, falling margins and higher wage costs.
CBA chairman Tim Besley told shareholders at the bank's annual meeting that nothing in the first three months of the year had changed earlier forecasts of flat profits in the current year to June 30, 1997.  
"We are now three months into the financial year and nothing has changed to prompt the bank to revise this assessment," Besley said in his chairman's address.
"1996/97 is shaping up to be every bit as challenging as we envisaged," he said.
"The home loan market remains intensely competitive."
Commonwealth Bank reported a net profit of A$1.12 billion in 1995/96, up from A$983 million in 1994/95, and said when it released its results in August that it expected earnings to be flat in 1996/97.  
Besley said CBA's directors aimed to maintain the ratio of dividends per share to earnings per share at around 80 percent in 1996/97.
However, Besley also said later at the meeting that banking industry profits could fall over the long run and that CBA would have to work hard to ensure its profit falls were less than those of other banks.
"We have to be sure that ours (profits) come down by as little as any of the others," Besley said in answer to a shareholder's question.  
Besley later told reporters banking industry profits would be under pressure in the future.
"The industry will be under pressure of falling profits unless, just like in any other industry, it pays great attention to its costs and gets very efficient," he said.
"There's no suggestion that (the CBA's) profits would fall off this year," he said, adding that it was the bank's objective to increase profits in 1997/98.
CBA Managing Director David Murray also played down Besley's earlier comments. "I read that comment to mean a fall in the growth rate in profits," he said.  
When asked if he too aimed for a rebound from the flat 1996/97 to profit growth in 1997/98, Murray said: "Yes. It means marketing better and containing our costs."
But he said it was too early to be specific about a possible profit rise in 1997/98. Murray however also told the annual meeting that cost control would be difficult.
He said CBA had restricted wages growth to four percent in the two years before the most recently negotiated enterprise bargaining agreements.  
"That (four percent over two years) is clearly not sustainable with the inflation rate and wage expectations where they are but we continue to bargain hard on that front."
CBA's share price closed down 11 cents at A$11.90, having earlier fallen to A$11.80 on the bearish comments from the annual meeting. "It's all on this talk of no earnings growth and wages pressure," one Melbourne broker said before the late session bounce.
Murray and Besley also repeated their view that official interest rates were more likely to be cut than raised before the end of the year.  
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Rupert Murdoch predicted he would win his legal battle with Ted Turner and Time Warner Inc. and said his global media company, News Corp. Ltd., was on track to boost profits 20 percent this year.
In remarks published in News Corp.'s Courier Mail newspaper in Brisbane, Murdoch also was quoted as saying that he did not want to buy out Australia's other major newspaper publisher, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
News Corp. publishes major tabloid newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne, the Courier Mail and The Australian, also owns about 5 percent of Fairfax.
Discussing his recent feud with CNN founder Ted Turner and Time Warner, Murdoch said he was confident News Corp. would win its lawsuit against the $6.7 billion merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and New York-based Time Warner, which was completed on Thursday after shareholders of both companies approved the deal.
"We've got a good stoush (fight) there," Murdoch said. "We'll win through there. How or where I don't know but we'll just keep the pressure on," he said.
Turner said on Thursday that Murdoch's lawsuit to block the merger of Turner Broadcasting and Time Warner, which creates the world's biggest media company, was a "frivolous piece of junk."
Murdoch and Turner have fought a pitched battle in recent months over the merger. At issue is whether Time Warner, the United States' second-largest cable operator, will carry Murdoch's new all-news channel that will compete with CNN.
News Corp. is seeking $1 billion in damages from Time Warner and Turner, saying their decision not to carry News Corp.'s 24-hour Fox News Service showed they were stifling competition.
"They promised me very firmly we'd have 9 million subscribers and when the day came to sign the document, they weren't there," Murdoch said in the interview, referring to Time Warner's decision not to carry the new channel.
Turner was forced to apologise last week for comparing Murdoch to Adolf Hitler, while Murdoch has described CNN as liberal and his executives have said Turner was monopolistic.
Murdoch also confirmed his bullish outlook for News Corp.'s profits.
"If the American economy holds where it is and the British one does, yes certainly," a 20 percent rise in profits is attainable, he told the Courier Mail. "But it is still early days to be saying that."
News Corp. said after releasing its results in late August that a 20 percent profit rise in the year to June 30, 1997 was attainable. News earned A$1.02 billion ($790 million) net profit in fiscal 1996.
Murdoch also said he had no plans to buy out John Fairfax Holdings, which publishes broadsheet newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne and is News Corp.'s major competitor in newspaper market.
He said Australian-based rival media owner Kerry Packer was also unlikely to bid for Fairfax any time soon.
"I don't want to buy Fairfax. I don't believe Mr. (Kerry) Packer wants to buy Fairfax," he was quoted as saying.
"To my knowledge he (Packer) has three times tried to sell his shares within the last 12 months. He'd like to influence and have the power of Fairfax but he's too shrewd to be paying for Fairfax at today's price."
Canada's Conrad Black, whose Hollinger International Inc. owns 25 percent of Fairfax and who has expressed a desire to take control of the group, expressed surprise at Murdoch's comments.
"(Murdoch's statement) is fairly humorous. It's a bit rich given the fact that he never stops telling me how much he would like to own Fairfax," Black said by telephone Friday.
"I cannot obviously comment on what the others are doing or what Rupert's motives are. The fact is that he regularly expresses to me considerable hypothetical interest in Fairfax," he said.
Hollinger International owns the Chicago Sun-Times, daily and weekly publications in the United States and the Jerusalem Post.
Rupert Murdoch predicted in a newspaper interview on Friday that his global media group News Corp Ltd was on track to boost profits 20 percent this year and would win its legal battle with Ted Turner and Time Warner.
Murdoch, visiting Australia for News' annual meeting next Tuesday, also told News' Courier Mail newspaper in Brisbane that he did not want to buy out Australia's other major newspaper publisher, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
News, which publishes the major tabloid newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne as well as the Courier Mail and The Australian, also owns about five percent of Fairfax.
Rejoining his recent feud with CNN owner Ted Turner and Time Warner, Murdoch said he was confident News would win its law suit launched last week against Turner and Time Warner over their proposed merger.
"We've got a good stoush (fight) there," Murdoch said.
"We'll win through there. How or where I don't know but we'll just keep the pressure on," he said.
Turner said on Thursday that Murdoch's lawsuit to block the merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc and Time Warner was a "frivolous piece of junk."
Murdoch and Turner have fought a pitched business battle in recent months over Turner's plans to merge his Cable News Network (CNN) with Time Warner, creating the world's largest media group.
At issue is whether Time Warner, the United States' second largest cable operator, will carry Murdoch's soon-to-be launched competitor to CNN.
News Corp is claiming US$1 billion in damages from Time Warner and Turner, saying their decision not to carry News' 24-hour Fox News Service showed they were stifling competition.
"They promised me very firmly we'd have nine million subscribers and when the day came to sign the document, they weren't there," Murdoch said of the Time Warner decision.
Turner was forced to apologise last week for comparing Murdoch to Adolf Hitler, while Murdoch has described CNN as liberal and his executives have said Turner was monopolistic.
Murdoch also reaffirmed News' bullish outlook for profits.
"If the American economy holds where it is and the British one does, yes certainly (the 20 percent rise is attainable)," he told the Courier Mail.
"But it is still early days to be saying that," the newspaper quoted Murdoch as saying.
News said after its 1995/96 results in late August that a 20-percent profit rise in the year to June 30, 1997 was very attainable. News posted a A$1.02 billion (US$790 million) net profit in 1995/96.
But it did not repeat the 20-percent forecast in its annual report last month, creating some doubt about the outlook.
Murdoch also said he had no plans to buy out John Fairfax Holdings, which publishes the major broadsheet newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne and is News' major competitor in newspapers.
But he said Australian-based rival mogul Kerry Packer was also unlikely to bid for Fairfax any time soon if current goverment restrictions were lifted.
"I don't want to buy Fairfax. I don't believe Mr (Kerry) Packer wants to buy Fairfax," he said.
"To my knowledge he (Packer) has three times tried to sell his shares within the last 12 months. He'd like to influence and have the power of Fairfax but he's too shrewd to be paying for Fairfax at today's price."
Murdoch also criticised the conservative government of Australian prime minister John Howard for not implementing radical economic reforms immediately.
(A$1 = US$0.79)
News Corp Ltd chairman and chief executive Rupert Murdoch, visiting Australia for News' annual meeting next week, says his global media group remains on track to boost profits by 20 percent in 1996/97.
Murdoch, in a newspaper interview published on Friday, also ruled out any potential News Corp bid for Australian newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd and said Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd had repeatedly tried to sell its 15 percent Fairfax stake in the last year.
News Corp owns about five percent of Fairfax.  
Rejoining his recent feud with CNN owner Ted Turner and Time Warner, Murdoch also said he was confident his law suit against the two would succeed.
Turner said on Thursday that Murdoch's lawsuit to block the merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc and Time Warner was a "frivolous piece of junk."
Murdoch said he was confident he would win the legal action launched last week to block the Turner merger with Time Warner.
"We've got a good stoush (fight) there," Murdoch said.
"We'll win through there. How or where I don't know but we'll just keep the pressure on," he said.  
Murdoch repeated News' bullish outlook for profits.
"If the American economy holds where it is and the British one does, yes certainly (the 20 percent rise is attainable)," he told News Corp's Courier Mail newspaper in Brisbane.
"But it is still early days to be saying that," the newspaper quoted Murdoch as saying.
News Corp said after its 1995/96 results in late August that a 20 percent profit rise in the year to June 30, 1997 was very attainable. News posted a A$1.02 billion net profit in 1995/96.  
Murdoch then said the government's investigation of the current cross-media rules, which stop the dual ownership of newspapers and television stations in the same city, would benefit Packer. Murdoch predicted the cross-media restrictions would be removed, but that foreign ownership rules would stay.
"So it will leave things open for him (Packer) and not for us," Murdoch said.
The rules currently stop Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd from increasing its 15 percent holding in Fairfax while it owns the top-rating Nine Network.  
They also stop Murdoch's News from increasing its 15 percent stake in the Seven Network Ltd while it owns News Ltd newspaper publishing change. Foreign ownership rules stop News from increasing its five percent stake in Fairfax.
Asked what he expected to emerge from the government's investigation into the cross-media rules, Murdoch said: "I think whatever Mr Packer wants. He seems to have very close influence with certain ministers in this government."
Murdoch would not name the ministers.
However Packer was unlikely to push for a higher Fairfax stake at the moment, Murdoch said.  
"I don't want to buy Fairfax. I don't believe Mr (Kerry) Packer wants to buy Fairfax," he said.
"To my knowledge he (Packer) has three times tried to sell his shares within the last 12 months. He'd like to influence and have the power of Fairfax but he's too shrewd to be paying for Fairfax at today's price."
Fairfax is 25 percent owned by Conrad Black's Hollinger International Inc, which is majority owned by Hollinger Inc.  
Murdoch also criticised the conservative government of Australian prime minister John Howard for not implementing decisive changes to boost the economy.
"If you're going to make radical changes, you'd better make them in the first year," Murdoch said of the government, which defeated the Labor government in the election on March 2.
"I think they've been slow to do that and not appearing as radical a government as I would have hoped," he said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Rupert Murdoch on Tuesday reported that News Corp. Ltd. had performed below expectations in the first quarter, but he said the global media group was still on track for a 20 percent profit rise this year.
Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of News Corp., also unveiled a more conservative approach to financing new acquisitions.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20 percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp. annual meeting in Adelaide.
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," Murdoch said.
Analysts viewed the comments as disappointing and said they were now more sceptical about the 20 percent profit pledge.
"If they can't meet expectations in the first quarter, when they have those strong revenues from 'Independence Day," then what hope do they have of getting 20 percent in the full year?" asked one Sydney-based media analyst referring to a hit Hollywood movie made by News Corp's Fox studio.
Traders on the Australian share market did not like the first quarter comment either, selling the shares 14 cents or almost two percent lower to close at A$7.20 ($5.69), while the broader Australian stock market closed at a record high.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion ($806 million) from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95 ($1.08 billion).
Murdoch said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, said Murdoch.
But he remained buoyant about News' British operations, saying the advertising market there was booming and the partly-owned BSkyB pay television operation was growing strongly.
Murdoch then unveiled a more cautious strategy for financing future expansion.
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance. It almost collapsed under a debt mountain in the early 1990s.
Rupert Murdoch on Tuesday reported that News Corp Ltd had performed below expectations in the first quarter, but he said the global media group was still on track for a 20-percent profit rise this year.
Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of News Corp, also unveiled a more conservative approach to financing new acquisitions.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20-percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp annual meeting in Adelaide.
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," Murdoch said.
Analysts viewed the comments as disappointing and said they were now more sceptical about the 20-percent profit pledge.
"If they can't meet expectations in the first quarter, when they have those strong revenues from Independence Day, then what hope do they have of getting 20 percent in the full year?" asked one Sydney-based media analyst referring to a hit Hollywood movie made by News Corp's Fox studio.
Traders on the Australian share market did not like the first quarter comment either, selling the shares 14 cents or almost two percent lower to close at A$7.20, while the broader Australian equity market closed at a new record high.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion ($806 million) from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95.
Murdoch said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, said Murdoch.
But he remained buoyant about News' British operations, saying the advertising market there was booming and the partly-owned BSkyB pay television operators was growing strongly.
Murdoch then unveiled a more cautious strategy for financing future expansion.
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance. It almost collapsed under a debt mountain in the early 1990s.
Analysts said the comments indicated a more conservative approach towards acquisitions and their financing and would be welcomed by the market.
"It imposes a huge financial discipline on the company which would hearten people immensely," said another analyst.
(A$1 = $0.79)
News Corp Ltd's unveiling on Tuesday of plans to run its finances more conservatively were welcomed by analysts who have sometimes been critical of News' previous big debt and equity issues.
Rupert Murdoch, the chief executive and chairman of the global media group, told the company's annual meeting in Adelaide that News now had over US$2.5 billion of cash in the bank after a bond issue last week and planned to keep it there.
"We know that we have to be not only viable and profitable, but also that we should stay strong and liquid," Murdoch said.  
Murdoch then said News Corp's multi-billion dollar plans to create huge pay television networks in the United States, Asia, Japan, Latin America and Australia would be financed from cash flow. He also said News Corp needed to keep its liquidity up to finance new acquisitions.
"We have outlined these plans to show you where we are and where we plan to go. As far as possible, we will finance them out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.  
Analysts said the comments indicated a more conservative financial strategy, constrasting with the big acquisitions, investments and big debt and equity issues of the past.
The analysts said the market, which has sometimes been critical of the big deals and the big calls on the market, would welcome the comments.
News Corp's issue of preference shares earlier this year to fund the US$2.48 billion buy out of New World Communications upset many and triggered a slump in the price of the preference shares.  
"It's slightly more conservative and the market will like it," said Macquarie Equities media analyst Alex Pollak of Murdoch's latest approach.
"The market is absolutely paranoid that they'll go out and spend A$1.5 billion on something that they will not like," Pollak said.
"Anything with more money spent on the big picture stuff, they're not going to like much," he said, adding the market wanted News to concentrate on ploughing money into its existing pay television networks in the United States.  
Analysts said Murdoch's comments about keeping the US$2.5 billion in the bank and financing projects from cashflows indicated any acquisitions would be small by Murdoch standards.
"That imposes a huge financial discipline on the company which would hearten the market immensely," said a Sydney media analyst. "If he can keep to those comments then it's most certainly a big plus," he said.
News Corp shares closed 14 cents or 1.9 percent lower at A$7.20 after Murdoch said the first quarter was not up to earlier expectations of a 20 percent profit rise in 1996/97. But he said News remained on track for that 20 percent rise.  
"If they can't meet their expectations in the first quarter when the strong revenues from 'Independence Day' are coming, then what hope do they have for the full year," one analyst said.
The hit movie was made by News Corp's Twentieth Century Fox subsidiary.
"His comments about the first quarter were weaker than what people were anticipating and it looks like U.S. television was one are of disappointment," another analyst said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Media magnate Rupert Murdoch said on Tuesday the first quarter performance of his global media group, The News Corp Ltd, had been below expectations, but that he was still confident of a 20 percent profit rise in 1996/97.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20 percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp annual meeting in Adelaide.  
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," he said.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95.
He said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, he said.  
However, News Corp's British newspapers were doing extremely well, with circulation at The Sunday Times climbing with little promotion while advertising in Britain was booming.
Murdoch, News Corp's chief executive and chairman, also announced the group now had US$2.5 billion in cash in the bank after recent U.S. bond issues and would leave it there.
He also said that News now planned to fund future expansion from cash flow where possible.
"We know that we have to be not only viable and profitable, but also that we should stay strong and liquid," Murdoch said.  
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance.
Murdoch also announced that News planned to float its British based digital media technology company, Digital Media Services, within the next two to three weeks and would sell 20 percent of the company.  
Digital Media Services, a combination of News Data Comm and Digi-Media Vision Ltd, would operate in Britain and Israel and produce technology for digital television.
He also later said News' Asian satellite pay television operation, STAR TV, was performing well.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Media magnate Rupert Murdoch said on Tuesday that the first quarter performance of his global media group, The News Corp Ltd, had been below expectations, but that he was still confident of a 20 percent profit rise in 1996/97.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20 percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp annual meeting in Adelaide.
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," he said.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion (US$806 million) from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95.
He said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, he said.
However, News Corp's British newspapers were doing extremely well, with circulation at The Sunday Times climbing with little promotion while advertising in Britain was booming.
Murdoch, News Corp's chief executive and chairman, also announced the group now had US$2.5 billion in cash in the bank after recent U.S. bond issues and would leave it there.
He also said that News now planned to fund future expansion from cash flow where possible.
"We know that we have to be not only viable and profitable, but also that we should stay strong and liquid," Murdoch said.
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance.
Murdoch also announced that News planned to float its British based digital media technology company, Digital Media Services, within the next two to three weeks and would sell 20 percent of the company.
Digital Media Services, a combination of News Data Comm and Digi-Media Vision Ltd, would operate in Britain and Israel and produce technology for digital television.
He also later said News' Asian satellite pay television operation, STAR TV, was performing well.
A$1 = US$0.79
Rupert Murdoch on Tuesday reported that News Corp Ltd had performed below expectations in the first quarter, but he said the global media group was still on track for a 20-percent profit rise this year.
Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of News Corp, also unveiled a more conservative approach to financing new acquisitions.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20-percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp annual meeting in Adelaide.
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," Murdoch said.
Analysts viewed the comments as disappointing and said they were now more sceptical about the 20-percent profit pledge.
"If they can't meet expectations in the first quarter, when they have those strong revenues from Independence Day, then what hope do they have of getting 20 percent in the full year?" asked one Sydney-based media analyst referring to a hit Hollywood movie made by News Corp's Fox studio.
Traders on the Australian share market did not like the first quarter comment either, selling the shares 14 cents or almost two percent lower to close at A$7.20, while the broader Australian equity market closed at a new record high.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion ($806 million) from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95.
Murdoch said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, said Murdoch.
But he remained buoyant about News' British operations, saying the advertising market there was booming and the partly-owned BSkyB pay television operators was growing strongly.
Murdoch then unveiled a more cautious strategy for financing future expansion.
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance. It almost collapsed under a debt mountain in the early 1990s.
Analysts said the comments indicated a more conservative approach towards acquisitions and their financing and would be welcomed by the market.
"It imposes a huge financial discipline on the company which would hearten people immensely," said another analyst.
Murdoch also announced that News planned to float its British-based digital media technology company, Digital Media Services, within the next two to three weeks and would sell 20 percent of the company.
Digital Media Services, a combination of News Data Comm and Digi-Media Vision Ltd, would operate in Britain and Israel and produce technology for digital television.
News Corp traditionally holds its annual meetings here in Adelaide, the South Australia city where Rupert Murdoch's father Keith founded the beginnings of the News Corp empire.
(A$1 = $0.79)
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) took the unusual step on Monday of categorically denying a newspaper report which said it was investigating a A$24 billion merger with Britain's Standard Chartered Plc.
"ANZ advises that it is not investigating or discussing a merger with Standard Chartered Bank," ANZ said in a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange just before the start of trade.
"Whilst we do not normally comment on rumours and speculation regarding mergers and acquisitions the very specific nature of the article requires this definite denial," the ANZ said in a statement.
Earlier, an ANZ spokesman had told Reuters that the report was in the category of market speculation and would not be commented on.
In its Monday edition, the Australian Financial Review reported that the two banks had engaged Goldman Sachs and Swiss Bank Corp to conduct a feasibility study into a merger "along the lines of the RTZ-CRA stock stapling".  
RTZ Corp Plc and CRA Ltd merged to become a dual-listed company and the world's biggest mining group in December last year.
"Such an alliance would make ANZ almost takeover-proof in Australia, preserving the relative independence of one of the two major banks considered most likely takeover targets after the Wallis inquiry into the financial system," the Financial Review said.  
"There are no cross-shareholdings between ANZ and Standard Chartered and the issue of 'senior partner' in a stock stapling would be expected to be significant as would government and regulatory approval of the deal," the paper said, adding that KPMG had been employed to carry out due diligence on the deal.
The bank's surprisingly specific denial came after analysts said ANZ's share price could drop sharply on the report.
The analysts said the merger as outlined in the report was unlikely to include much if any takeover premium for shareholders, meaning the premium of up to 10 percent built into the current share price would be stripped out.  
"People are saying 'What's in it for shareholders?'," BNP Equities banking analyst Linda Lyon said.
"If a merger like that looks like coming off, then the price will come off," Lyon said.
"The sort of deal we're talking about doesn't include any sort of takeover premium for shareholders," said a senior Sydney banking analyst.
"People have been buying ANZ above its true value in expectation NAB (National Australia Bank Ltd ) will launch a takeover post-Wallis," the analyst said.  
"My guess is that the immediate reaction would be negative," he said, adding he saw ANZ's true price at around A$6.50.
But after the denial, ANZ's share price rose with the rest of the market. It was up two cents at A$7.18 at 12.50 p.m. (0150 GMT).
Analysts said such a merger could however also bring out a potential rival takeover bidder such as HSBC Holdings Plc.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Gold miner Niugini Mining Ltd, which owns 17.15 percent of the shares in Papua New Guinea's Lihir Gold Ltd, said on Monday it was looking at ways of giving those Lihir shares back to its shareholders.
"We're looking at the possibility of returning the Lihir shareholding to shareholders and when that can be done," Nuigini Mining chief executive Ian Goudie told Reuters.
Goudie said a straight forward return of the shares to shareholders could not approved until late 1998 given the Lihir mine's current debt arrangements.  
But Nuigini was also looking at other structures through which the shares could be returned before then, he said.
He said the Lihir share return was just one of several possible ways of unlocking the true value of the Lihir stake, which was not reflected in Niugini's current share price.
"The whole purpose is to unlock this mismatch," he said.
Niugini's assets could viewed in two parts -- the Lihir stake and other smaller mining assets, he said.
"If the two parts were to be separated they would appear to have more value to shareholders."
Australian-based insurer QBE Insurance Group Ltd said on Tuesday that profit growth was likely to surge into the high teens for the full 1996/97 year after only a slight increase in its first quarter profit.
"I'm confident that it will be in the teens, and with a bit of luck it will probably be in the high teens," QBE managing director John Cloney told reporters after the group's annual meeting when asked about profit growth for the full year.
Earlier QBE reported a first quarter net profit of A$28.5 million, up just slightly from A$28.0 million a year earlier.  
QBE's full year net profit rose 15.1 percent to A$123.3 million in 1995/96 ended June 30.
Analysts said the first quarter result may have been disappointing, partly due to costs linked to the installation of a new computer system, but the bullish comments were a welcome tonic.
"We're still very happy to see around 15 percent profit growth per annum," said First Pacific insurance analyst Greg Galton.
QBE's share price responded in kind, rising 15 cents to A$6.70 in early Tuesday afternoon trade after Cloney's comments.  
Cloney also said that QBE expected reduced expense ratios over 1996/97 because of improved productivity linked to the new computer systems.
QBE should also achieve its target of double digit premium growth from existing lines and lower acquisition costs, he said.
He also said he saw a continuation of the trend of previous years of increased dividends, but that the franking rate was likely to be reduced to about 50 percent as previously foreshadowed.  
Cloney said QBE's A$70 million acquisition of the British reinsurance assets of Allstate Insurance Co announced in September would also boost profits in 1996/97.
"That will give us in excess of 15 percent return (on equity invested) in this fiscal year," he said.
Referring to this strong rate of return from this latest acquisition, Cloney said QBE continued to be on the look-out for similarly profitable acquisitions.
"We are on the lookout all the time, and there are a couple of things that may come to pass," Cloney said, adding however that he could not be more specific.  
But he said Australia was less likely to be a happy hunting ground for QBE because other competitors and banks were prepared to bid high prices and push down rates of return.
"They're the sort of hurdle rates we set," he said, referring to the 15 percent-plus return likely from Allstate.
"Because we're already earning 17 percent (return on shareholders funds) we're not in the position to spend up large and say we'll get a pay back in three or four years, because it will dilute our overall earnings," he said.  
"So far as Australia is concerned, to acquire at the sort of hurdle rates of return we're looking for is a little difficult because I think there are more people interested in what's available here than overseas."
Cloney also ruled out any bank acquisitions.
"QBE ought to be allowed to buy a bank if it wishes to do so but it is my own personal view and, I believe the view of the board, that we will not be doing that," he said.
-- Bernard Hickey -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Stock-feed producer Ridley Corp Ltd forecast on Wednesday that slow demand and margin pressures would produce a flat first half year profit, but that a grain price slump would help boost profits for the full 1996/97 year.
"All things considered we expect overall company after tax earnings to be in line with those of last year for the first half," Ridley Chairman John Keniry told the group's annual meeting.  
Strong pasture growth in some areas which had significantly cut demand for stockfeed, along with margin pressures from high wheat prices earlier the year had combined to push Australian stockfood earnings lower in the first quarter of the year to June 30, 1997.
First quarter earnings from Ridley's AgriProducts division had been below both budget forecast and last year's results, Keniry said.
Keniry said Ridley expected another good result from its Canadian stock food supplier, Feed-rite, to offset the falls from Australia's AgriProducts in the first half.  
"For the first quarter Feed-Rite's earnings before interest and tax have exceeded by a comfortable margin both budget and last year," Keniry said.
But he said a sharp slump in grain prices, one of Ridley's key inputs, could boost margins again in Australia later in the year if prices stayed down.
"When we look to the full year, we must recognise a very rapid decline in the past month or so in grain prices, and the somewhat unpredicatble impact on both us and our customers of these changes," Keniry said.  
"Nevertheless on a full year basis, a cautious approach would be to say that we presently expect to come in slightly ahead of last year," he said.
Ridley said last month it expected continued profit growth and was optimistic of achieving another record performance in the 1996/97 year to June 30.
It reported an operating profit of A$36.27 million million in 1995/96, up 14.3 percent on the previous year and hard on the heels of three to four years of significant profit rises.  
Later, Ridley managing director Gary Busenshut reiterated the flat immediate outlook but more buoyant longer term prospects for the year.
"As we harvest between October and January, we're going to see some improvement in margins," he said.
Busenshut said Ridley also continued to focus on further acquisitions both in Australia and in North America, particularly now that its A$98 million takeover bid for Australian malster Joe White Maltings Ltd looked unlikely to succeed.  
The A$5.44 per share offer was rejected by Joe White and Ridley has said it would not increase the offer before it closes on November 8. Ridley now has about 18 percent of Joe White.
Ridley would continue to look at potential malting acquisitions in Australia and stock-feed milling operations in North America, Busenshuts said.
He said Ridley had had discussions with potential feed-milling targets in North America and could carry out an acquisition worth about A$100 million by the end of the March quarter of 1997 if it decided to. Ridley's shares closed up one cent at A$1.70.  -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Water filtration company Memtec Ltd is confident the failure of its planned US$280 million takeover bid for U.S. medical filtration company Gelman Sciences Inc will not affect earnings or its U.S. expansion plans.
Memtec chairman Denis Hanley told Reuters in a telephone interview from the United States that a compensation clause in the original takeover deal negotiated with Gelman meant it would not affect Memtec's earnings in the year to June 30, 1997.  
"There were clauses in the contract that compensated us for our effort," Hanley said.
"It will have no impact on our normal earnings," he said.
In July, Gelman said it had agreed to be taken over by the NASDAQ-listed Memtec, which offered 1.05 Memtec American Depositary Receipts (ADRS) for each Gelman share.
The offer than valued each Gelman share at about US$35 a share, but Memtec's share price fell after the July announcement and the agreement included a clause allowing Gelman to renegotiate or terminate the deal if Memtec's share price fell below US$30.  
On Monday, Gelman agreed to a takeover bid by fellow filtration company Pall Corp, which valued Gelman's shares at US$33 per share and effectively trumped Memtec's bid.
Memtec then said on Tuesday it would not increase its bid and that the original merger agreement had been terminated.
Hanley said he and Memtec's management had spent months preparing for the Gelman takeover and organising a roadshow promoting the bid, but that Memtec had been compensated for the costs involved.
He said Memtec's likely growth in the United States this year would not be affected by failure of the deal.  
"This year the growth we'll probably see will still be better than 50 percent without this deal," he said.
Memtec remained on the lookout for expansion opportunities in the United States, particularly in the medical filtration sector.
"We see many ways of getting into the medical market there," he said, adding however that he could not be specific about how Memtec would increase its presence.
Gelman makes microfiltration products for laboratories, healthcare, environmental monitoring, high-technology process industries and other uses.  
The end of the Gelman deal has pleased shareholders however, with Memtec's shares jumping A$3.50 to A$41.50 by Wednesday's close from its A$35 level on Monday.
Memtec had been around A$42.50 in mid-July.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd is likely to benefit from the planned US$20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp and British Telecommunications Plc, Australian media analysts said on Monday.
News Corp, which already has a wide-ranging partnership with MCI, would strengthen its global media interests on the coat-tails of the creation of the world's second largest telecommunications group, the analysts said.
"It means they'll be in bed with a bigger, more powerful global telephony group," one senior Sydney media analyst said.
Analysts also said the BT-MCI merger would stabilise New Corp's partnership with MCI, which had seemed increasingly strained in recent months.
"It seems that MCI and News haven't been getting on lately, whereas News and BT have been getting on a lot better," said the Sydney analyst.
The prospect of MCI selling its nine percent stake in News Corp over the next year had suppressed News Corp's shares last month.
"There was a view that MCI wasn't real happy with it (the partnership) and may sell out, but now nothing's going to happen for 12 months at least," said another Sydney analyst.
"The implications for News are quite positive."
A Melbourne analyst said some in the market were a bit worried that MCI was preparing to sell down its stake over the next 12 months. "The fact that BT may combine with MCI reduces that risk for now at least," one analyst said.
MCI and News Corp announced a broad alliance in May 1995, under which MCI bought a nine percent stake in News for US$1.35 billion and acquired an option to increase that stake to 13.5 percent. They agreed, among other things, to jointly set up an American satellite television operation -- ASkyB.
But progress with ASkyB has been slow and other smaller joint ventures have failed to fire. Australian analysts said they would remain cautious towards ASkyB, given bearish comments on Sunday by MCI. MCI announced that it would cut its stake in ASkyB to 20 percent from 50 percent.
Analysts said this was not surprising as News Corp and MCI had said recently they wanted new partners in the venture.
MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts told Reuters on Sunday that no major new launches were expected from the venture with News Corp and that MCI wanted to sell a US$700 million satellite license to News.
He also said MCI was unlikely to take up its option to increase its stake in News, a comment seen by analysts as symptomatic of Roberts' increasing unhappiness with the deal.
Analysts also warned there was a potential regulatory block to links between News, its 40 percent owned BSkyB Plc, and BT.
"There's an outside risk that British regulatory bodies could try and block the News-BSkyB-BT side of it," said a BT analyst.
Other analysts said the dilution involved, with BT owning nine percent of a 40 percent stake in BSkyB, would assuage regulatory concerns. The likely election of a British Labour government also reduced that risk.
"They're banking on (Labour leader) Tony Blair winning government and deregulating cross media rules in the United Kingdom," said another Sydney analyst.
However, another analyst pointed to the recent banning by British regulator Oftel of a joint marketing campaign between BT and BSkyB as a sign of the rocky road ahead for News and BT.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Appliance and building products manufacturer Email Ltd reported a lower half year net profit and dividend on Monday but forecast that recent restructuring and a seasonal lift would boost profits in the second half.
Email said the environment for industrial activities remained difficult and recent economic forecasts had deferred the timing of an upturn in building sector.  
"Nevertheless, the significant improvements in the company's pre-tax operating profits flowing from restructuring across the past 12 months, are expected to continue in the second half," the company said in a statement accompanying half year results.
"As well there should be the normal seasonal lift in sales and margins, leading to a second half profit well ahead of the first half," it said.
Earlier Email reported a pre-abnormal net profit of A$27.26 million for the first half to September 30, up from A$24.83 million the previous corresponding half a year earlier.  
Net profit however fell to A$23.85 million from A$26.61 million the previous year, due largely to abnormal losses of A$3.41 million incurred in restructuring and reducing overheads. Email also cut its interim dividend to eight cents from 11.5 a year earlier, saying it had realigned dividends to reflect the stronger second half year in the light of continuing uncertainty about the economy.
Email Managing Director John Hanna later told Reuters Email expected pre-tax profits for the second half of the 1996/97 year would also be above those in the second half of 1995/96.  
"We are expecting in the second half that we would have pre-tax operating profits higher than last year," Hanna said.
"We should also have the second half seasonal lift."
He said Email was pleased that it achieved profit growth in its building products and major appliances divisions despite lower sales.
Analysts said the result was within expectations and was largely unsurprising, even with the dividend cut.
"It's still a high payout ratio," said one Sydney analyst said of the dividend, noting that the final dividend was likely to be maintained.  
Email's share price was unchanged at A$3.55 at 1.10 p.m. (0210 GMT) on light volumes.
Hanna said there could begin to be an upturn in the housing industry at the beginning of 1997, but that this would take some time to flow through to Email's business because its products were installed late in the building process.
"If it (the upturn) was early 1997, then it (the resulting flow-on) would be in mid-1997," he said.
But this flow-on effect would then have an immediate effect on Email's bottom line because of the recent restructuring which had reduced overheads.  
"As there's an upturn, we should get that immediately and a lot of that will go to the bottom line immediately," Hanna said.
He also said Email may increase its 20 percent stake in British electricity meter maker Ampy Automation Digilog Ltd.
"There may be an opportunity to lift that stake in the future," Hanna said. He said Email remained on the lookout for further acquisitions.
"They (any further acquisitions) would have to be in existing core areas ... but I don't think we have anything directly in line at the moment," he said.
-- Bernard Hickey 61-2 9373-1812
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd is likely to benefit from the planned US$20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp and British Telecommunications Plc , Australian media analysts said on Monday.
They said News, which already has a wide-ranging partnership with MCI, would strengthen its global media interests on the coat-tails of the creation of the world's second largest telecommunications group.
"It means they'll be in bed with a bigger more powerful global telephony group," one senior Sydney media analyst said.  
Analysts also said the BT-MCI merger would stabilise New Corp's partnership with MCI, which had seemed increasingly strained in recent months. "It seems that MCI and News haven't been getting on lately, whereas News and BT have been getting on a lot better," said the senior Sydney analyst.
The prospect of MCI selling its nine percent stake in News Corp over the next year had suppressed News Corp's shares in the last month. "There was a view that MCI wasn't real happy with it (the partership) and may sell out, but now nothing's going to happen for 12 months at least," said another Sydney analyst.  
"The implications for News are quite positive," the analyst said.
A Melbourne analyst said some in the market were a bit worried that MCI was preparing to  to sell down their stake over the next 12 months. "The fact that BT may combine with MCI reduces that risk for now at least," the analyst said.
MCI and News Corp announced a broad alliance in May 1995, under which MCI bought a nine percent stake in News for US$1.35 billion and acquired an option to increase that stake up to 13.5 percent. They agreed, amoug other things, to jointly set up an American satelite television operation -- ASkyB.  
But progress with ASkyB has been slow and other smaller joint ventures have failed to fire.
However, the Australian analysts said they would remain somewhat cautious given bearish comments on Sunday by MCI.
MCI announced that it would cut its stake in ASkyB to 20 percent from 50 percent.
Analysts said this was not surprising as News Corp and MCI had said recently they wanted new partners in the venture.  
But MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts also told Reuters on Sunday that no major new launches were expected from the venture with News Corp and that MCI would sell to News a US$700 million satellite license if it could.
He also said MCI was unlikely to take up its option to increase its stake in News, a comment seen by analysts as symptomatic of Roberts' increasing unhappiness with the deal.
Analysts also said there was the potential for a regulatory block to links between News, its 40 percent owned BSkyB Plc and BT.  
"There's an outside risk that British regulatory bodies could try and block the News-BSkyB-BT side of it," said another BT analyst.
Other analysts said the dilution involved, with BT owning nine percent of a 40 percent stake in BSkyB, would assuage regulatory concerns. The likely election of a British Labour government also reduced that risk.
"They're banking on (Labour leader) Tony Blair winning government and deregulating cross media rules in the United Kingdom," said another Sydney analyst.  
However another analyst pointed to the recent banning by British regulator Oftel of a joint marketing campaign between BT and BSkyB as a sign of the rocky road ahead for News and BT.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
National Mutual Holdings Ltd managing director Geoff Tomlinson said on Thursday that strong investment markets meant group earnings for the 1996/97 year were likely to be in line with the July prospectus forecasts.
"It's been a very kind year. I can't think of when the markets have been more conducive to our type of business," Tomlinson told Reuters in an interview.  
He said he could not give a formal forecast of the profit result for the just completed year to September 30 but an examination of the assumptions in National Mutual's share offer document would show the forecasts were likely to be met.
"You can go back and look at the investment assumptions in the share offer document and compare them with where we were at the end of September and we were in the fortunate position where most of the markets finished in line with predictions," he said.
"That would give you some underlying view that it's likely that our performance will be in line with that projection."  
National Mutual forecast in its offer document a consolidated net profit after tax of A$198 million for the year ending September 30, up from A$115.5 million in 1994/95.
The assumptions underlying the forecast included an Australian 90 day bill rate of 7.5 percent as at September 30, a 10-year bond rate of 8.75 percent at September 30 and a U.S. 10 year bond rate of 6.50 percent as at September 30.
The offer document, issued before National Mutual demutualised and listed on the Australian Stock Exchange last month, said its profit was not significantly sensitive to its stock market assumptions.
Australian-based metals recycler Simsmetal Ltd on Friday painted a bleak picture for world scrap metal prices over the year ahead and said this meant the group's net profit for 1996/97 would be lower than in 1995/96.
But it said it remained confident it could take advantage of a recovery in world markets when it came and was currently in talks to buy a large British scrap metal business.
Simsmetal managing director John Crabb told the annual meeting that scrap prices had softened dramatically to their lowest levels in almost four years over the last two months.  
"Until there is an improvement in the major economies of Europe and Asia and the resulting increase in demand for metals, we expect trading conditions to remain very difficult with volumes, margins and earnings below our expectations," Crabb said.
He later told reporters profits for the year to June 30, 1997 would be below the A$46.7 million posted in 1995/96 -- a result that was itself 23 percent down on a year ago.
"It will be lower for the full year," Crabb said.  
Simsmetal had previously only said it saw difficult conditions prevalent in the first quarter of 1996/97 continuing into the second quarter, with second quarter profits falling.
In mid-October, Simsmetal announced its net profit for the first quarter of 1996/97 fell 34 percent to A$8.28 million.
Crabb said the world construction markets which used the long steel produced by electric furnaces supplied by Simsmetal remained weak and had no immediate prospect of improvement.
"Our view is that we should start to see some improvement (in ferrous metals prices) towards the end of calendar 1997, we may see it in the middle (of calendar 1997)," he said.  
"We can't see too much on the horizon at this time," he said.
Crabb also said Simsmetal was in talks to buy a large British business in the same area as Simsmetal, but he said he could not give any more details as he was bound by confidentiality agreements.
"It's in the U.K. For us it will be quite large," he said.
"We still need to balance our portfolio there, so that we've got a good broad coverage," he said.
"We'll use either some cash or our unusued borrowing lines. We've got no problems funding it."  
He said Simsmetal had ended the first quarter with about A$62 million cash on hand.
"I guess we'd only be using 55-60 percent of our borrowing capacity at the moment."
Simsmetal had total non-current borrowings of A$54.11 million as at June 30, 1996, giving a total warchest for possible acquisitions of about A$115 million.
Earlier in the annual meeting, Crabb said that any closure of the Broken Hill Pty Co Pty Ltd's Newcastle steel plant would not affect Simsmetals operations.  
Crabb said Simsmetal supplies most of its products to BHP's Sydney mini-mill and its Port Kembla plant, south of Sydney.
"Maybe it will make life easier for us because we will be able to buy more scrap," Crabb said, responding to a shareholders question.
Simsmetal's shares were up one cent at A$6.89 at 2.40 p.m. (0340 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Westpac Banking Corp Ltd is expected to report on Tuesday that its net profit growth was reined back to a slower 10 percent in the 1995/96 year by an increasingly competitive home loan sector and a slower economy.
Analysts said the main focus in the results would be on how that increased competition and recent sharp cuts in home lending margins would hit Westpac's profits in 1996/97.
"You're really only going to have a full impact for the year ending September 1997," Morgan Stanley banking analyst John Hobson said of the sliding home loan margins.  
"There'll start to be a moderating influence (on profits) which intensifies throughout 1997," he said.
"You'll see fairly cautious statements being made at the briefing."
The median forecast in BZW's BARCEPs analyst survey is for a net profit before abnormals for the year to September 30, 1996 of A$1.12 billion, up about 10 percent from A$1.02 billion in 1994/95.
This compares with a 44 percent rise between 1993/94 and 1994/95.
World yeast and spices giant Burns Philp &amp; Co Ltd announced a hefty loss for the 1995/96 year on Wednesday after taking some heavy hits in a vicious U.S. price war and Asian expansion.
Burns Philp, the western world's largest fresh bakers' yeast maker and second largest spice maker, posted a net loss of A$61.8 million (US$48.8 million) for the year to June 30.
This came after abnormal losses of A$136.6 million, due largely to rationalisation of its U.S. operations and other costs linked to a spice price war with the world's largest spice maker, McCormick &amp; Co Inc of the United States.
Burns Philp managing director Ian Clack said the tussle for market share in the United States appeared to have abated, but the cost of paying supermarkets for premium shelf space during the two-year war had to be written off.
The writing off of these costs, known as slotting contracts, made up A$33.9 million of the abnormal losses.
"Recent slotting contracts have been negotiated with improved margins, indicating that market conditions are returning to a more acceptable level," Clack said.
He said Burns Philp had increased its U.S. spices market share by one percentage point to 16 percent after the war while McCormick's share had risen 1.5 points to 34 percent. Other U.S. spice makers lost market share, he said.
Burns Philp has 16 percent of the western world's yeast market and seven percent of its spice market.
Costs incurred during an Asian expansion also boosted Burns Philp's losses.
"The result was also affected by the cost of expanding our presence in Asia together with plant upgrade costs in China and India," Clack said.
The result surprised brokers and analysts, who had expected large abnormal losses but were disappointed by a lower pre-abnormals net profit as well.
Net profit before abnormal items fell to A$74.8 million, down from the A$104.1 million posted in 1994/95 and down on most analysts' forecasts of about A$80 million.
Burns Philp's decision not to post a final dividend also upset investors.
"A woeful result and passing their dividend hasn't helped," said Jim Tredenick, senior dealer at broking house Nevitts Ltd.
Burns Philp's share price closed down 10 cents at A$1.95.
Analysts also said there may be more abnormal losses to come, particularly in the value of intangibles like goodwill.
"It was a bad result...the issue is whether or not they've completely taken the knife to intangible valuations, that's the area where there could be some further writedowns," one Sydney analyst said.
"They didn't take much off the intangibles. That (the A$30.7 million of intangible writedowns) hardly made a dent in it," another Sydney analyst said.
Clack said the company had taken the most conservative measure of intangible values it could and did not expect any more abnormal losses in the current year.
He said an earnings turnaround was possible in 1996/97. "In most markets we are seeing some improvement in the first two months of the year. There's been an improvement in demand, particularly in the North American markets." (A$1 = 79 U.S. cents)
Australia's second-largest bank, Westpac Banking Corp Ltd, announced a 19.5 percent rise in net profit for the 1995/96 year on Tuesday, but warned that fierce competition would flatten profits in the year ahead.
"Everywhere you look and in every market we're in there's a lot of margin pressure," Westpac managing director Bob Joss told a news conference after the profit announcement.
"It will be tough to make a rise," he said when asked if profits for the year to September 30, 1997, would be flat.
Westpac reported net profit of A$1.132 billion (US$890 million) for the year to September 30, 1996, up 19.5 percent on 1994/95.
But this disguised a flat profit in the second half of the year and was boosted by a sharp drop in bad debt charges.
Joss said competition from non-bank mortgage originators in the housing loan sector was a key factor pressuring margins.
Mortgage originators such as Aussie Home Loans and RAMS Home Loans, who have snared 10 percent of the mortgage market from big banks like Westpac over the last two years by offering cut price home loans.
Their entry into the market has dragged the big banks' home loan margins down from over 300 basis points last year to just over 200 points now.
Joss said Westpac would look to boost its own mortgage origination programme to help compete against the non-banks and support its margins.
Westpac has already launched one issue of securitised mortgages worth A$340 million, the first of the major banks to do so.
Joss said Westpac planned to multiply the size of such issues in the current year.
"The real key for us will be to try to manage our balance sheet, have more assets off balance sheets, more securitising of lower margin assets," he said.
"We just did one near the tail end of the (1995/96) year, A$340 million, so we would expect to see quite a bit more in the year ahead," Joss said.
Even then, Westpac would struggle to maintain its margins and would have to cut costs and increase efficiency to compensate.
The bearish earnings comments and the detail of the result saw Westpac's share price close down 15 cents at A$7.05, despite the result being almost exactly the average of analysts' forecasts.
Westpac is the second major bank to forecast flat profits in the year ahead because of increased competition. The Commonwealth Bank of Australia since May has been forecasting flat profits over the next year.
These more sober forecasts signify the end of two to three years of sharp profit rises for the major banks as they recovered from hefty loan losses in the early 1990s and capitalised on a strong economy.
A smaller New South Wales-based bank, St George Bank Ltd, echoed this new more subdued outlook for profits in its annual results also announced on Tuesday.
St George reported net profit of A$148.3 million for the 1995/96 year, a rise of 9.4 percent.
St George managing director Jim Sweeney said margin pressure meant it would be a challenge to improve profits in the first half of the current year. (A$1 = US$0.7880)
Australia's second largest bank, Westpac Banking Corp Ltd, announced a 19.5 percent rise in net profit for the 1995/96 year on Tuesday, but warned that fierce competition would flatten profits in the year ahead.
"Everywhere you look and in every market we're in there's a lot of margin pressure," Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss told a news conference after the profit announcement.
"It will be tough to make a rise," he said when asked if profits for the year to September 30, 1997 would be flat.  
Westpac reported a net profit of A$1.132 billion for the year to September 30, 1996, up 19.5 percent on 1994/95, but this disguised a flat profit in the second half and was boosted by a sharp drop in bad debt charges for year.
Bad debt charges fell to A$121 million in 1995/96, down sharply from A$330 million in 1994/95, a fall which Westpac said contributed about A$200 million to the 12 percent rise in pre-tax and abnormals profit to A$1.389 billion.
Joss said competition from non-bank mortgage originators in the housing loan sector was a key factor pressuring margins.  
Mortgage originators such as Aussie Home Loans and RAMS have taken over 10 percent of the mortgage market from the big banks including Westpac over the last two years, dragging home loan margins down from over 300 basis points to just over 200 points. Joss said Westpac would look to boost its own mortgage origination programme to help compete against the non-banks and support its margins.
Westpac has already launched one issue of securitised mortgages worth A$340 million, the first of the major banks to do so.  
Joss said Westpac planned to multiply the size of such issues in the current year.
"The real key for us will be to try to manage our balance sheet, have more assets off balance sheets, more securitising of lower margin assets," he said.
"We just did one near the tail end of the (1995/96) year, A$340 million, so we would expect to see quite a bit more in the year ahead," Joss said.
When asked how much more than A$340 million, he said: "Multiples of A$340 million."
Even then, Westpac would struggle to maintain its margin.  
Westpac reported in its accounts for the year that the group's net margin had fallen to 370 basis points over the whole 1995/96 year, down from 380 basis points over 1994/95.
Joss said the fall was already apparent towards the end of the year to September.
"At the tail end of the year, it's actually less than what you would have seen for the year," Joss said.
He acknowledged Westpac would find it difficult to keep that margin from falling from 370 points.
Given the margin pressure, Westpac would continue to focus on increasing transaction and other fees to compensate.  
"In such an environment, maintenance of overall net earnings growth will depend increasingly on attaining improvements in fee income generation, particularly non lending-related fees and on improved efficiency of operations," Joss said in an earlier statement.
He told the news conference he would like to see Westpac's efficiency ratio, which measures expenses to income, fall below 60 percent from the 62.6 percent evident in 1995/96.  
This ratio worsened during the year from 60.6 percent in 1994/95, due largely to the costs of acquiring and restructuring the Western Australian-based Challenge Bank and Trust Bank of New Zealand.
Joss said rationalisations throughout Westpac over the next two years would help to lower costs, improve efficiency and therefore compensate somewhat for the slimmer margins.
The bearish comments from Joss helped Westpac close 15 cents lower at A$7.05.
-- Bernard Hickey -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Airline giant British Airways Plc (BA) is unlikely to hike its airfares by the full three percent agreed to last week by the world's airlines, BA chairman Sir Colin Marshall said on Monday.
The world's airlines, desperate to hold up their profits in the face of a 40-percent surge in fuel prices this year, said in Geneva last week through the International Air Transport Association (IATA) that they proposed to raise passenger fares by three percent.
Marshall told reporters after a luncheon address in Sydney that BA was not as badly affected as some other airlines because of the strength of sterling against the U.S. dollar.
"You also have to bear in mind that the impact for individual carriers does depend on exchange rates in that all aviation fuel is priced in U.S. dollar terms," he said.
"So one has to watch what is happening to your own currency versus the U.S. dollar to see what the overall impact will be for a company," he said.
When asked if the recent strength in sterling meant BA would therefore not pass on the full three percent agreed to in Geneva, he said: "I think that's quite likely."
He said BA had increased its prices by only about one percent before the Geneva resolution because of the strong currency.
"The pound has been relatively strong against the dollar and that's why we only applied about a one-percent increase in price."
IATA, which has 251 member airlines, said in Geneva the proposed increase, which is subject to government approvals, would apply to fares from December 15.
Marshall said the extent to which the three percent increase was applied depended on each individual carrier and how fuel prices changed through the northern hemisphere's winter.
Many European carriers are pushing for a concerted move to lift ticket prices by up to three per cent, but Asian and North American carriers were believed to be reluctant to do so.
BA reported earlier this month that despite strong traffic growth and greater productivity its first half operating profits were down 2.1 per cent compared with last year.
Part of the drop, it said, was due to the extra US$84 million it had had to pay for fuel.
Meanwhile, Marshall said he was confident the European Union would not thwart BA's plan to form an alliance with American Airlines, although he acknowleged it would take the two a long time to jump the various regulatory hurdles in front of them.
"I'm not worried about it because I don't think that that is likely to happen," Marshall said of a possible EU block.
On Friday the European Commission (EC) said it had formally asked BA for details of the planned alliance.
A report that the EC had said the alliance did not appear to be in the best interests of consumers pushed BA's shares lower earlier on Friday.
"There are so many precedents for similar events that have been allowed to go into effect, that to me it would be quite wrong if the European Union reached that conclusion," he said.
"I think things are all moving in the right direction, but it's just very slow," Marshall said of the regulatory process.
Australia's largest retailer, Coles Myer Ltd, forecast a rejuvenation in its profit outlook at its annual meeting on Tuesday but failed to stop shareholders launching into a six-hour tirade aimed at Coles' directors.
The prime target was former executive chairman Solomon Lew, who was re-elected as a director with the help of proxy votes after the floor of the meeting overwhelmingly rejected his re-election. Coles Chairman Nobby Clark, who was jeered when he tried to cut short debate on Lew's re-election, said Coles was seeing something of a rejuvenation in its businesses.  
"We're on the edge of something pretty good," Clark told the annual meeting. "We do have an upside and I'm confident we can do better for you," he said.
"First quarter performance is running above expectations and we hope that can continue," he said, adding that provided Christmas trading was reasonable, Coles Myer's bottom line results should improve in 1996/97.
The Brunei Investment Agency (BIA) on Tuesday bought a 13.4 percent stake in Macquarie Bank Ltd, removing the links between one of Australia's top four investment banks and its British founder.
Macquarie said in a stock exchange statement just after the start of morning trading that the Brunei government-owned agency paid Lloyds TSB Plc A$151.7 million (US$122.8 million) for the stake.
The purchase by the agency's Brunei Investment and Commercial Bank (BICB) from Lloyds' Hill Samuel &amp; Co unit makes it the largest individual shareholder in Macquarie.
Macquarie Bank managing director Allan Moss said the bank had developed a good relationship with BIA and its senior management over the months it had taken to arrange the deal.
"We are delighted that they have become associated with the bank as a major shareholder, and we are confident that BICB will prove to be a constructive and long term investor in Macquarie," Moss said.
The purchase ends Hill Samuel's 27-year direct involvement in the Australian investment banking sector.
Hill Samuel set up what is now known as Macquarie Bank in 1969 before selling down its stake to 30 percent in 1985 and then down to 15 percent in 1993.
Since then Macquarie, which now has 1,800 staff, has listed on the Australian Stock Exchange and is now one of Australia's top 100 companies.
It has offices throughout Australasia and in China, Singapore, Malaysia, London, Munich, New York, Hong Kong, Indonesia and South Africa. Its asset base stood at A$5.17 billion on March 31, the end of its financial year.
Macquarie also has more than A$20 billion in assets under management and has operations in corporate finance, sharebroking and in commodities, debt and foreign exchange trading.
It posted net profits of A$93.2 million in 1995/96.
Macquarie Equities ranks amoung the top four brokers in terms of turnover on the Australian Stock Exchange and had the biggest inflow of retail funds for management in the year to June 30, 1996.
Macquarie chairman David Clarke told a news conference he was confident that BICB was a stable shareholder.
"By and large you only read announcements of them buying things and investing in things you don't read about them selling out of things," Clarke said.
The sale of the Hill Samuel stake appears to remove from the market a convenient bridgehead for a takeover bid from another Australian bank.
Australia's conservative government is currently reconsidering financial regulations governing bank takeovers.
A report by the government-sponsored Wallis inquiry due in March next year is widely expected to trigger a series of bank takeovers.
($A = US0.81 cents)
An inquiry into Australia's financial system has left open the option of mergers among Australia's big banks and takeovers of local banks by foreign banks in an interim discussion paper released on Wednesday.
The inquiry, established by the government and headed by prominent businessman Stan Wallis, outlined various options for reform and was careful not to state its own preferences.
But it said the key aim of any reforms should be increasing the efficiency of Australia's banks to compete globally and that new technology would transform the sector. Big banks such as the National Australia Bank Ltd have used the same reasoning lobbying for relaxed merger rules.
The banks have said big bank mergers are necessary to compete globally and new technology such as the Internet and global competition meant such mergers would not cut competition.
Policy set by the former Labor government has stopped mergers or foreign takeovers of Australia's four largest banks and its two largest insurance and superannuation groups.
The current conservative coalition government has said this so-called "six pillars" policy will remain in place until it has considered the Wallis inquiry's recommendations, due to be delivered by the end of March 1997.
"The Inquiry sees as its key goal the identification of means to increase the efficiency of the Australian financial system, without compromising its safety and peformance," the paper said. Increased efficiency was needed to complete globally, to obtain the benefits of new technology and to increase investment returns, the paper said. It asked if competition and innovation could be stimulated by widening access to traditional banking activities through:
* "Allowing direct non-bank access to the payments settlement system"
* Better accomodating financial conglomerates
* Allowing an increased range of institutions to provide a wider array of financial services, or
* relaxing some of the ownership restrictions on financial institutuions ?"
The inquiry said it was also wanted any reforms to increase competition and asked in that context "whether there are any public policy grounds for restrictions on foreign acquisitions in the banking or insurance industries?"
In discussing the details of how bank mergers might be approved, the inquiry said there was widespread consensus that banks should be subject to the same competition rules as other industries. Currently any bank merger must be approved by the government through the Treasurer and by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC). This dual approval process does not apply in other industries.  
"In undertaking its assessment, the Inquiry notes its preference...for all sectors of the economy to be subject to a uniform set of competitionpolicy laws unless there is something sepcial which justifies different treatment," the paper said.
The Inquiry said it would consider the following options for merger approvals, including;
* keeping the current system of dual approval
* having the Treasurer accept the ACCC's decision, or * narrowing powers over mergers in banking and insurance law It said there would be no need for a 'six pillars' policy if the Treasurers powers were removed or if he agreed not to excercise them. "There was almost unanimous support that the 'six pillars' policy should be abolished," the paper said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
An official inquiry into Australia's financial system said on Thursday it would look at recommending a relaxation of rules that currently stop big bank mergers and local bank takeovers by foreign banks.
The inquiry, which was established by the conservative government after its March election, outlined various options for reform in a wide-ranging discussion paper and was careful not to state its own preferences.
But it noted majority industry support for abolishing the rules stopping mergers and foreign bank takeovers and said it preferred an anti-monopolies system which treated the banking sector the same way as every other sector.
Until now the government has had the final say on bank mergers, rather than just the anti-monopolies watchdog.
Analysts said the tone of the discussion paper reinforced widespread expectations that the inquiry's final report would recommend allowing bank mergers and new foreign investment.
"It hasn't changed perceptions that ultimately the inquiry will make recommendations that allow the ACCC (Australian Competition and Consumer Commission) to permit bank mergers which haven't been permitted before," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett Banking analyst Michael Pulman.
Shares in the big banks seen vulnerable to takeover have rallied since the beginning of the year in expectation that a conservative Australian government would allow the mergers.
Those seen as possible takeover targets include the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Westpac Banking Corp Ltd.
The National Australia Bank Ltd, Australia's largest and most profitable bank, is seen as the main predator.
A policy set by the former Labor government and known as the "six pillars" policy has stopped mergers or foreign takeovers of Australia's four largest banks and its two largest insurance and superannuation groups.
The current conservative Liberal-National coalition government has said this policy would remain in place until it has considered the Wallis inquiry's recommendations, due to be delivered by the end of March 1997.
The inquiry, headed by prominent businessman Stan Wallis, said in its 415-page paper that any reforms should increase the efficiency of Australia's banks to compete globally.
It also said new technology would transform the sector.
Big banks such as the National Australia Bank have used the same reasoning when lobbying for relaxed merger rules.
These banks have said big bank mergers are necessary to compete globally and new technology such as the Internet and global competition meant such mergers would not cut competition.
"The inquiry sees as its key goal the identification of means to increase the efficiency of the Australian financial system, without compromising its safety and peformance," the paper said.
Increased efficiency was needed to compete globally, to obtain the benefits of new technology and to increase investment returns, the paper said.
It said it would consider, "better accomodating financial conglomerates" and "relaxing some of the ownership restrictions on financial institutuions?"
The inquiry said it also wanted any reforms to increase competition and asked in that context "whether there are any public policy grounds for restrictions on foreign acquisitions in the banking or insurance industries?"
An official inquiry into Australia's financial system said on Thursday it would look at recommending a relaxation of rules that currently stop big bank mergers and takeovers by foreign banks.
The inquiry, which was established by the conservative government after its March election, outlined various options for reform in a wide-ranging discussion paper and was careful not to state its own preferences.  
But it noted majority industry support for abolishing the rules stopping mergers and foreign bank takeovers and said it preferred an anti-monopolies system which treated the banking sector the same way as every other sector.
Until now the government has had the final say on bank mergers, rather than just the anti-monopolies watchdog.
Analysts said the tone of the discussion paper reinforced widespread expectations that the inquiry's final report would recommend allowing bank mergers and new foreign investment.  
"It hasn't changed perceptions that ultimately the inquiry will make recommendations that allow the ACCC (Australian Competition and Consumer Commission) to permit bank mergers which haven't been permitted before," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett Banking analyst Michael Pulman.
Shares in the big banks seen vulnerable to takeover have rallied since the beginning of the year in expectation that a conservative government would allow the mergers.
Possible takeover targets include the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Westpac Banking Corp.  
The National Australia Bank Ltd, Australia's largest and most profitable bank, is seen as the main predator.
A policy set by the former Labor government and known as the 'six pillars' policy has stopped mergers or foreign takeovers of Australia's four largest banks and its two largest insurance and superannuation groups.
The conservative coalition government has said this policy would remain in place until it has considered the Wallis inquiry's recommendations, due to be delivered by the end of March 1997.  
The inquiry, headed by prominent businessman Stan Wallis, said in its 415 page paper any reforms should increase the efficiency of Australia's banks to compete globally.
It also said new technology would transform the sector.
Big banks such as the National Australia Bank have used the same reasoning when lobbying for relaxed merger rules.
These banks have said big bank mergers are necessary to compete globally and new technology such as the Internet and global competition meant such mergers would not cut competition.  
"The Inquiry sees as its key goal the identification of means to increase the efficiency of the Australian financial system, without compromising its safety and peformance," the paper said.
Increased efficiency was needed to complete globally, to obtain the benefits of new technology and to increase investment returns, the paper said.
It said it would consider, "better accommodating financial conglomerates," and, "relaxing some of the ownership restrictions on financial institutuions".  
The inquiry said it was also wanted any reforms to increase competition and asked in that context "whether there are any public policy grounds for restrictions on foreign acquisitions in the banking or insurance industries?"
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Australia's wealthy baby-boomers are disillusioned with service provided by banks and believe loyalty is not rewarded, a survey released on Monday found.
Those approaching retirement were also unhappy with the performance of their superannuation funds and were looking to move elsewhere wherever possible, the survey by forecaster BIS Shrapnel has found.  
"Australia's affuent boomers -- the demographic group owning the largest share of private wealth -- are distrustful of the performance and motivations of financial institutions, and yearn for a return to the days when customer loyalty was rewarded," BIS Shrapnel said in the survey titled "Financial Services for the Affluent Boomers."
Those surveyed had assets worth over A$150,000, excluding the family home.
The survey of 128 people aged over 45 in 14 seperate focus groups around Australia found they sought more individual treatment by knowledgable staff.  
"In particular those approaching retirement are more likely to equate good service with personal service and contact," BIS Shrapnel survey project leader Geoff Ludowyke said.
"They want to develop a relationship with one particular person within their banking branch," he said.
The survey found that Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) was the least liked of all the banks, Ludowyke said.
Respondents found the CBA slower, more unfriendly, more impersonal and less modern than the other banks, he said.  
Westpac Banking Corp Ltd was seen as the next least-liked bank while the ANZ Banking Group Ltd and the National Bank Ltd were seen in another group in-between CBA and the credit unions, which were the most favourably received.
Former building societies like St George Bank Ltd and Advance Bank Ltd, which are in the process of merging, were seen as similar to the credit unions.
"Among the major banks with the most negative comments were the Commonwealth and Westpac," Ludowyke told Reuters.  
"ANZ and NAB were in the next group while the credit unions were in another group out front," he said.
The survey also found that rich baby-boomers did not believe that swapping pension funds would improve their returns.
"They intend to move away from superannuation," Ludowyke said.
Law changes were also generating anxiety about superannuation, he said. "Affluent boomers expect governments to continue to change the rules in a way that will benefit governments rather than contributors," he said.
The survey also found that banks were perceived as greedy.  
"Reports of huge profits compound the resentment to bank fees and banks are believed to be primarily concerned with looking after their shareholders rather than their customers," the report said. "Affluent boomers are particularly annoyed by new charges for ATM and EFTPOS usage."
Ludowyke said BIS Schrapnel would approach the big financial institutions for funding for a more comprehensive survey of 800 people face to face on attitudes towards the financial institutions.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
The Reserve Bank of Australia's (RBA) rate cut on Wednesday is expected to further squeeze bank margins as competition has forced them to pass this cut on to their mortgage customers sooner than usual.
The major banks have previously delayed passing on the effect of official rate cuts to their variable rate home loan customers by around seven weeks.
They would, however, often begin lowering variable and fixed deposit rates immediately, providing a temporary widening of their margins.  
Wednesday's rate cut has seen the major banks shorten this delay in passing on the rate cut to about five and half weeks.
Analysts and some of the banks said increasing competition from non-bank mortgage lenders and the regional banks had been the major factor in this contraction.
They also said they expected this gap to narrow further when further official rate cuts are made next year.
"The implication is a bit more pressure on margins," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett banking analyst Michael Pulman.
"This all about competition," he said.  
"These competitive forces will end up contracting it down further, possibly down to 30 days," said Aussie Home Loans managing director John Symond.
Aussie, the biggest of the non-bank lenders funded by mortgage origination, said on Wednesday it would cut its variable rate to 7.49 percent from 7.99 percent from January 28 for existing customers, a gap of 48 days after December 11.
At the time of the last official rate cut on November 6, Aussie planned a gap of 46 days, which was lower than most of the banks.  
In response to Aussie and competition from regional banks like St George Bank Ltd, the large banks have cut back this delay.
National Australia Bank Ltd said it would cut its variable mortgage rate to 8.25 percent from 8.75 percent from January 23 for existing borrowers, a gap of 43 days.
After the last official rate cut NAB's gap was 54 days.
In line with this trend, Westpac Banking Corp's gap has dropped to 37 days from 41 days and Commonwealth Bank of Australia's gap has dropped to 48 days from 54.  
The Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd has yet to announce any cut in variable mortage rates in response to the RBA's cut in the official cash rate to 6.0 percent from 6.5 percent.
The biggest move in the gap came from St George, which reduced the time it would pass on the rate cut for its major variable rate product to 20 days from 55 days.
St George has even said existing customers of its no frills variable rate product would receive the cut from December 18, a week away. This product provides 20 percent of its portfolio.  
Overall the average gap for the banks who have cut their mortgage rates has dropped to 40 days after this rate cut from 49 after the November 6 cut, which was also by 50 basis points.
There may, however,be a limit to how much further this gap can fall, analysts and the banks said.
A new regulatory code on credit specifies customers must be given 30 days notice whenever their interest rates are changed, creating an artificial barrier both up and down.
"I think 30 days will about see it out," said Aussie's Symond.  
Analysts said the banks may try other tactics to cushion the effect of this reduction in the gap, but that it would still further reduce already-bruised margins.
"It will have an effect on margins," said BNP Equities' banking analyst Linda Lyon.
"They'll do all sorts of other things to cushion the effect. They'll be trying to reduce their deposit rates as far and as fast as they can," said ABN AMRO's Mike Pulman.
"But there's obviously a bit of a squeeze there, particularly for those banks most exposed to the housing sector," Pulman said.  
CBA is seen as the most exposed with about 34 percent of its assets in home loans, with Westpac next on 25 percent and NAB and ANZ on about 17 percent.
The big bank's margins on home loans have already declined this year from about three percent in June to about 2.25 percent now.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year on Friday, despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, in part, the successful rationalisation of our wholly owned businesses and strong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in particular, continues to justify our confidence in its long-term growth prospects in the region," he said in Brambles' profit statement.
Brambles' net profit rose 120.2 percent to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95. The previous year's result was undermined by an abnormal loss of $112.3 million.
Stripping away abnormals, profit for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 30 percent from Europe and the United States respectively, while Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew at twice the rate in Australia and the trend is likely to continue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further contributions from CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.
Fletcher later told Reuters this strong performance from Brambles' non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively look at further acquisitions outside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to areas like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from the United States and Europe should continue to offset soft Australian conditions and help produce profit growth.
"We haven't got an expectation that we will get too much help from this economy...for at least another six months," he said. "But all in all we've got enough things going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he said.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operations as the main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying positive things about CHEP in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said.
Brambles' shares closed up five cents at A$18.90 against a soft market overall.
(A$=US$0.79)
Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year on Friday despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the company said.  
"The continuing improvement in our performance reflects, in part, the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned businesses and strong growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in particular, continues to justify our confidence in its long term growth prospects in the region," he said in Bramble's profit statements.
Brambles' net profit rose to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, but the previous year's result was undermined by a large abnormal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 30 percent from Europe and the United States respectively, while Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew at twice the rate in Australia and the trend is likely to continue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further contributions from CHEP in Europe and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively look at further acquisitions outside Australia.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to areas like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from the United States and Europe should continue to offset soft Australian conditions and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got an expectation that we will get too much help from this economy ... for at least another six months," he said. "But all in all we've got enough things going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operations as the main bullish note.
"CHEP USA is the outstanding area," said Macquarie Equities analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying positive things about CHEP in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," another Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed up five cents at A$18.90 against a soft market overall.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Australia-based transport, logistics and security group Brambles Industries Ltd said it was actively considering acquisitions in United States, Europe and Asia in the current year.
Brambles chief executive John Fletcher told Reuters in an interview that Brambles would only look at acquisitions in areas where it had Australian experience.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said.  
"Anything new we'll do on home turf," he said.
Fletcher repeated that Brambles was looking at participating in the privatisation of Australia's airports being carried out before June next year.
Fletcher said the vehicle for airport investment would be Bramble's joint venture company, Australian Airport Services, formed with property and financial services company, Lend Lease Corp Ltd.
Brambles would look at acquisitions in the Northern Hemisphere in the industrial services, waste management, equipment rentals and records management areas.  
Earlier Brambles reported a 120.2 percent jump in net profit to A$215.1 million for the year to June 30, 1996. Before abnormals, the net profit rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the upper end of analysts' expectations of A$208 million to A$214 million.
Fletcher said the result would have been a bit ahead of brokers' expectations.
"It's a marginally pleasant result rather than a huge shock," he said.
Strong growth in earnings from Brambles CHEP pallet business in the United States helped boost the results.  
Fletcher said the Australian economy, which provides the bulk of Bramble's earnings, remained flat and was expected to remain so for some time.
"We haven't got an expectation that we will get too much help from this economy ... for at least another six months," he said.
The U.S. economy remained strong while Europe and Britain were flat, he said.
"But all in all we've got enough things going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he said.  
Profits from Brambles overseas operations grew at twice the rate of those from local economies and this trend was likely to continue.
This continued overseas growth would however affect the allocation of franking credits on dividends.
"The continuing growth expected in overseas earnings meant that the company would need to reduce moderately the level of franking of dividends declared on 1996/97 earnings," Fletcher said in an earlier statement.
Recipients of franked dividends receive tax credits for Australian company tax already paid by the companies involved.  
Brambles posted a 35 cents per share fully franked final dividend for 1995/96, up from a 33 cents per share final dividend in 1994/95.
The total dividend rose to 69 cents per share from 65 cents.
Earnings per share rose to 97.6 cents from 84.8 cents.
Brambles' shares were down five cents at A$18.80 at 3.40 p.m. (0540 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Almost 300 students and workers from the islands of Kiribati were adrift in the central Pacific on Wednesday aboard a crowded charter ship crippled by a fire, officials said.
The 1,000-tonne MV Maasmond appealed for help on Tuesday night after losing power through the fire in the engine room.
It was found by a Royal New Zealand Airforce Orion rescue plane drifting about 800 kms (500 miles) east of the Kiribati island of Tarawa with 290 passengers on board.
"The Orion located it this afternoon and was told via radio that it's in no immediate distress and has enough food and water for five days," Airforce Squadron Leader Ron Irons told Reuters from the RNZAF's base in Nandi, Fiji.
"It has partially restored its electric power, but it has no wasy to start its engine," Irons said.
An electrical fire in a switchboard in the engine room shut down the ship's electrical systems late on Tuesday, leaving the converted freighter without power and still two days sailing from the nearest land.
The ship's charterer, Kiribati businessman Waysang Kumkee, said the MV Maasmond's insurers would pay for another ship to tow it back to Tarawa.
The 64.5-metre (210 foot) Maasmond was chartered to carry 290 passengers, mostly Kiribati students and workers, and 400 tonnes of cargo to Christmas Island from Tarawa, Kumkee said.
A tugboat was likely to take two days to reach the stricken ship and another two days to tow it back to Tarawa, he said, adding the passengers had plenty of food and water to last the four days.
"It's not a problem. If they run out they can easily borrow some of the cargo," Kumkee told Reuters by telephone from Tarawa, one of a group of coral atolls about 5,000 kms (3,000 miles) north-east of Sydney.
The cargo included rice and tinned food.
None of the passengers or crew had been injured in the fire and the only problem on board was likely to be boredom given the ship's video players were out of action. "With no videos, they'll be a bit bored," Kumkee said.
Most of the passengers were sitting or sleeping under canvas on blankets on the deck, he said.
They would be reduced to playing cards and their guitars until their rescue, he added.
The MV Maasmond is registered in Kingstown in St Vincent and Grenadines, according to the Lloyds List, and has had engine trouble in the past.
In 1992, it underwent engine repairs for ten weeks after encountering cyclones on a cruise through the Pacific.
Gaming and electronics group AWA Ltd said on Wednesday it wanted to buy up to 75 percent of the New South Wales government-owned betting agency, the Totalisator Agency Board (TAB), later this year.
AWA managing director John Rouse told Reuters in an interview that the company was looking at the option of a major recapitalisation to fund such an acquisition, which has been estimated to be worth around A$750 million.
"It's clear that AWA has a strong interest in participating in the privatisation of the TAB," Rouse said.  
He said the racing industry and AWA were looking closely at the model used to privatise the Victorian TAB, where the industry bought a 25 percent stake and 75 percent was privatised through Tabcorp Holdings Ltd.
AWA was considering the option of a major capital raising to fund the outright purchase of a 75 percent stake through a government trade sale, with an offer of a portion of the stake to the public later on.  
"You could have a situation where initially the capital raising is funded by financial institutions and maybe AWA's existing shareholder base, but within a period a portion of what has been acquired would be floated on a broader basis to the public," Rouse said.
The Labor government in New South Wales has yet to say publicly whether it would privatise the TAB, but is expected to announce within several months a plan to sell it either through a public float or a trade sale.  
Bidders however wanted the government to give some concrete assurances about the tax and licensing regime a privatisated TAB would face.
"It's important that the parameters in terms of tax and licensing are cast in concrete for some reasonable time," Rouse said.
AWA was aware of a desire within government and the wider public that the public be offered shares in any privatised NSW TAB at some stage, he added.
"We would be prepared to make commitments to the government that we would float it later on," he said.  
Rouse said there was a feeling within government and the racing industry that a trade sale would be preferable to a float.
"There are those that are close to this issue in government saying if New South Wales wants to deal with this matter quickly, if the racing industry wants to establish its financial arrangements sooner rather than later and the government doesn't want the costs of a public float, than a tender needs to be the preferred approach," he said.  
AWA's share price closed down two cents at 91 cents on Wednesday.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Dairy and fruit juice group National Foods Ltd said on Tuesday its reforms announced in July were now almost fully completed and the group was poised for above-budget profit growth in the next six to nine months.
"It's almost fully implemented," outgoing National Foods managing director Graham Reaney told Reuters in an interview.
"The real benefits start to emerge as people become more familiar with the new structures and clearly there'll be gains over the next six to nine months," Reaney said.  
Earlier on Tuesday National Foods posted a 17.3 percent higher operating profit before tax of A$37.6 million for the year to June 30.
Its net profit rose to A$15.05 million from A$10.77 million after an abnormal loss of A$7.89 million.
Net profit before abnormals rose to A$22.7 million from A$19.2 million, against analysts' expectations of about A$23 million.
National Foods said in announcing its results, earnings for July and August were ahead of budget and comfortably ahead of last year.  
Reaney repeated that this meant that 1996/97 profits were likely to be higher than in 1995/96, but he would not say how much higher. "But its clearly going in the right direction."
The reforms had created a more efficient distribution system for chilled foods, increasing sales coverage for National Foods' products, Reaney said.
"It's a combination of cost reduction and enhanced distribution, and looking at our beverage division, our flavoured milks are performing particularly strongly," he said.
"There are a number of areas that starting to perform a lot better for us."  
Reaney said the sale of non-core assets had also been completed and the company was now focused on extracting profit growth from existing assets.
"We would consider all businesses that we have today as core businesses," he said, adding, however, that he could not rule out future acquisitions.
"But the first objective to make those assets that we currently own work better, produce more profit, more cash flow."
Singapore's Camerlin Pte Ltd has about eight percent of National Foods and Hong Kong's Mingly Corp has about 10.4 percent of the company.  
Reaney said he would not comment on shareholders' intentions or actions or whether either of the Asian-based investors planned any takeover or had brought on any board room reshuffle.
He said he had resigned the managing director's position having worked for the company for five years. "Five to seven years is a normal period for a chief executive and quite genuinely I do have other things to do," he said.
"I'm quite relaxed and if it wasn't an amicable arrangement I wouldn't be staying on as a non-executive director," he said on his last day in the job.  
Reaney's replacement, Max Ould, was chief executive of Peters Foods until April and presided over the transfer of operations from Pacific Dunlop Ltd to Nestle Australia.
National Foods' shares closed up three cents at A$1.41.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
World-wide Australian transport group TNT Ltd reported another annual profit slump on Wednesday, but promised the sale of its troubled airline and other reforms would produce strong profit growth in current year.
"We haven't got any numbers, but it should be quite strong relative to the position we're starting from," TNT managing director David Mortimer said of prospective profit growth, in an interview with Reuters.  
TNT's net profit for the year to June 30 fell to A$9.84 million (US$7.79 million) from A$40.01 million in 1994/95 and A$105.05 million in 1993/94.
Mortimer said a sharp drop profits from Australia's Ansett Airlines, 50 percent owned by TNT, and losses from its Brazilian operations and local general freight business offset good revenue growth in TNT's core operations.
He said profits from these core activities of domestic and international time sensitive freight and logistics had grown 48.7 percent to A$165.3 million in 1995/96.  
TNT had moved to excise these loss-making units and focus on profitable core activities, he said.
"We've dealt with the (Australian) LCL (Less Than Container Load) business -- that's been closed, and we've sold Brazil," he said.
"What's the saying ... when in doubt shoot it or fix it."
TNT would also look to sell other unprofitable non-core businesses, Mortimer said.
"We've got other non-core activities and to the extent that they don't perform then they will be vulnerable to sale," he said.  
"The inconsistency in our results has come from these fringe activities ... it's that volatility around the earnings base that says we have to concentrate on core activities and get out of the non-core 'riff-raff' if you like," he said.
TNT announced earlier this week the finalisation of plans to sell its stake in Ansett to Air New Zealand Ltd for cash receipts of A$325 million. The other 50 percent of Ansett is owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.  
TNT's remaining non-core activities include an airline leasing company jointly owned with News Corp, some shipping operations between New Zealand and Australia, a mono-rail in Sydney and some information technology assets.
Mortimer would not single out any as potential immediate sale prospects, but said they were vulnerable while they were not making profits.
He said the airline leasing firm, Ansett Worldwide, needed to have its capital base restructured before it could be sold.  
Shareholders however took the profit slump in their stride, having actually forecast a slight loss, rather than a slight profit.
Net profit before abnormals, but after preference dividends, fell to A$0.6 million from A$38.48 million in 1994/95.
Analysts had expected a pre-abnormal, post preferences loss of between A$4 million and A$22 million.
TNT's shares closed up three cents at A$1.47.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Australian investment and property group Lend Lease Corp and Thailand's Modern Home Co announced on Tuesday they would build a markets complex in Northern Bangkok that would be Asia's largest.
"The 160 hectare, A$1 billion (US$778 million) project aims to create a new industrial commercial and residential hub in northern Bangkok, anchored around what is currently being established as Asia's largest single agricultural produce and export market," Lend Lease and Modern Home said in a joint venture announcement.
"The joint venture brings together the local experience of Modern Home and Lend Lease's international resources and financial strength," they said.
Stage one of the project, which was 60 percent complete and projected to cost A$700 million, was already processing 15,000 tonnes of produce a day and had parking for 25,000 vehicles.
The complex, known as the Thai Markets project, would be located on the main northern road from Bangkok and be about 20 km from the airport.
"Located in a key location in North Bangkok, the Thai Market has been conceived to tap into the high growth agricultural and industrial sectors as Thailand emerges as the 'food bowl of Asia'," the said.
The complex would eventually include food processing facilities so produce from surrounding areas could be packaged and processed for export.
The second and third stages, which would cost A$300 million, would include factories, retail outlets and homes to service the complex.
"There will also be a major discount retail and wholesale distribution facilities and shophouses," they said.
Lend Lease's Asian unit, based in Singapore, would contribute up to A$100 million to the joint venture for a 10 percent stake initially, with that percentage changing as the stages progressed.
The project is expected to take four years to complete.
A Lend Lease spokeswoman said she could not say how the percentage would change.
Modern Home chief executive Thanom Angkanawatana said the joint venture was a key step for his company.
"Lend Lease brings extensive experience, management skills and capital. Their international perspective will significantly strengthen the project and position future stages for the next upturn in the economy," Angkanawatana said in the joint statement.
"Completion of the adjacent Thammasart University and Asian Games complexes as well as continuing infrastructure investment in the area by the Thai government is expected to further benefit the project," the two partners said.
The state-owned Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) is backing the project and the Thai Ministry of Commerce also supports it, the Lend Lease spokeswoman said.
"The current success of the market project show, that it has strong fundamentals and makes it a good opportunity for Lend Lease," Lend Lease Asia managing director Richard Clarke said.
The announcement of the Thai joint venture is part of Lend Lease's widespread push into Asian property development.
Lend Lease announced on Monday it had formed a 50/50 joint venture with privately-owned U.S. firm Oakwood International Ltd to manage about 10,000 serviced apartments around Asia, including in Bangkok.
Lend Lease said it would initially contribute US$15 million for the management entity and would then seek additional capital.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Electronic payment systems company Intellect Holdings Ltd said on Tuesday its bid for Internet software firm Techway Ltd would allow it to launch a product for making secure payments on the Internet.
Intellect, which helped pioneer EFTPOS (Electronic Funds Transfer Point of Sale) technology and systems in Australia, wanted to export Techway's software in conjunction with its own secure electronic payments systems, Intellect executive chairman Ross Leighton told Reuters.  
Intellect already sold its EFTPOS hardware and software to 20 banks outside Australia and to five or six large banks in Europe, all of whom were investigating its use with the Internet.
"All banks are looking for greater service and lower costs and the internet is the way to do that," Leighton said in an interview.
Finding a user-friendly and secure way of making payments and money transfers on the internet has become something of a holy grail for programmers.  
Secure payments systems are seen dramatically increasing the volume of financial transactions made on the net, which are already growing strongly.
Techway's Web Australia unit built the software currently being used for internet banking by Advance Bank Ltd, which is merging with St George Bank Ltd.
Intellect announced late on Monday it would make a takeover offer for Techway Ltd in a counter-bid to a previous offer by Nova Pacific Capital Ltd.
Intellect said it will offer one of its shares for every 2-1/2 Techway shares. The bid values Techway at A$4.9 million.  
Techway, who had already signed a distribution agreement with Intellect, has recommended shareholders accept the bid.
Leighton said the success of Techway's software on the Advance Bank site was a key factor in Intellect's decision to launch a takeover bid.
Advance's Internet banking site is Australia's most successful and has been consistently rated amoung the world's top ten internet banking sites by The Money Pages, an Internet magazine that rates internet sites.  
Advance Bank spokesman David Brown said the Techway-designed site had 10,000 regular customers who used the site for about 10,000 transactions a week.
The site was picking up 150 new customers a week and each internet transaction cost the bank less than 10 cents, while an over the counter transaction cost about A$2.50, he said.
"The collaboration between Techway and Advance was a key for Advance getting the jump on our competitors," Brown said.
Intellect's Leighton said Techway's headstart in Australia meant it had a good chance of becoming the industry standard for Internet transactions in Australia.  
"It has the ability to become a defacto standard in Australia," Leighton said.
The marriage of Techway's secure transaction software and Intellect's EFTPOS hardware and systems would help accelerate the trend of convergence evident in recent years between debit cards, credit cards and EFTPOS, he said.
"As these different payments come together, you'll then see they'll be able to be more economically utilised over the Internet."  
Intellect's share price closed down three cents at 95 cents on Tuesday, giving it a market capitalisation of A$48.19 million.
Techway's shares closed up 5.5 cents at 37 cents.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
Australian investment and property group Lend Lease Corp and Thailand's Modern Home Co announced on Tuesday they would build a markets complex in Northern Bangkok that would be Asia's largest.
"The 160 hectare, A$1 billion (US$778 million) project aims to create a new industrial commercial and residential hub in northern Bangkok, anchored around what is currently being established as Asia's largest single agricultural produce and export market," Lend Lease and Modern Home said in a joint venture announcement.
"The joint venture brings together the local experience of Modern Home and Lend Lease's international resources and financial strength," they said.
Stage one of the project, which was 60 percent complete and projected to cost A$700 million, was already processing 15,000 tonnes of produce a day and had parking for 25,000 vehicles.
The complex, known as the Thai Markets project, would be located on the main northern road from Bangkok and be about 20 km from the airport.
"Located in a key location in North Bangkok, the Thai Market has been conceived to tap into the high growth agricultural and industrial sectors as Thailand emerges as the 'food bowl of Asia'," the statement said.
The complex would eventually include food processing facilities so produce from surrounding areas could be packaged and processed for export.
The second and third stages, which would cost A$300 million, would include factories, retail outlets and homes to service the complex.
"There will also be a major discount retail and wholesale distribution facilities and shophouses," they said.
Lend Lease's Asian unit, based in Singapore, would contribute up to A$100 million to the joint venture for a 10 percent stake initially, with that percentage changing as the stages progressed.
The project is expected to take four years to complete.
A Lend Lease spokeswoman said she could not say how the percentage would change.
Modern Home chief executive Thanom Angkanawatana said the joint venture was a key step for his company.
"Lend Lease brings extensive experience, management skills and capital. Their international perspective will significantly strengthen the project and position future stages for the next upturn in the economy," Angkanawatana said in the statement.
"Completion of the adjacent Thammasart University and Asian Games complexes as well as continuing infrastructure investment in the area by the Thai government is expected to further benefit the project," the two partners said.
The state-owned Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) is backing the project and the Thai Ministry of Commerce also supports it, the Lend Lease spokeswoman said.
"The current success of the market project show, that it has strong fundamentals and makes it a good opportunity for Lend Lease," Lend Lease Asia managing director Richard Clarke said.
The announcement of the Thai joint venture is part of Lend Lease's widespread push into Asian property development.
Lend Lease announced on Monday it had formed a 50-50 joint venture with privately-owned U.S. firm Oakwood International Ltd to manage about 10,000 serviced apartments around Asia, including in Bangkok.
Lend Lease said it would initially contribute US$15 million for the management entity and would then seek additional capital.
(A$1 = US$0.7780)
World-wide Australian transport group TNT Ltd reported another annual profit slump on Wednesday, but promised the sale of its troubled airline and other reforms would produce strong profit growth in current year.
"We haven't got any numbers, but it should be quite strong relative to the position we're starting from," TNT managing director David Mortimer said of prospective profit growth, in an interview with Reuters.
TNT's net profit for the year to June 30 fell to A$9.84 million (US$7.79 million) from A$40.01 million in 1994/95 and A$105.05 million in 1993/94.
Mortimer said a sharp drop profits from Australia's Ansett Airlines, 50 percent owned by TNT, and losses from its Brazilian operations and local general freight business offset good revenue growth in TNT's core operations.
He said profits from these core activities of domestic and international time-sensitive freight and logistics had grown 48.7 percent to A$165.3 million in 1995/96.
TNT had moved to excise these loss-making units and focus on profitable core activities, he said.
"We've dealt with the (Australian) LCL (Less Than Container Load) business -- that's been closed, and we've sold Brazil," he said.
"What's the saying ... when in doubt shoot it or fix it."
TNT would also look to sell other unprofitable, non-core businesses, Mortimer said. "We've got other non-core activities and to the extent that they don't perform, then they will be vulnerable to sale
"The inconsistency in our results has come from these fringe activities...it's that volatility around the earnings base that says we have to concentrate on core activities and get out of the non-core 'riff-raff,' if you like," he said.
Earlier this week TNT announced the finalisation of plans to sell its stake in Ansett to Air New Zealand Ltd for cash receipts of A$325 million. The other 50 percent of Ansett is owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.
TNT's remaining non-core activities include an airline leasing company jointly owned with News Corp, some shipping operations between New Zealand and Australia, a mono-rail in Sydney and some information technology assets.
Mortimer would not single out any of these as potential immediate sale prospects, but said they were vulnerable while they were not making profits.
He said the airline leasing firm, Ansett Worldwide, needed to have its capital base restructured before it could be sold.
Shareholders, however, took the profit slump in their stride, having actually forecast a slight loss rather than a slight profit.
Net profit before abnormals, but after preference dividends, fell to A$0.6 million from A$38.48 million in 1994/95.
Analysts had expected a pre-abnormal, post preferences loss of between A$4 million and A$22 million.
TNT's shares closed up three cents at A$1.47.
(A$1 = US$0.7920)
Australasian food group Goodman Fielder Ltd is expected to report a slightly higher annual net profit before abnormals early on Thursday, as firmer margins in some areas are seen largely offset by higher grain costs.
"I'll be looking for some margin growth, but also there's been some strong raw materials cost increases," one Sydney analyst said, adding he was forecasting a pre-abnormals net profit of just under A$100 million.  
The median forecast in BZW Australia's Barceps survey of analysts was for a A$100.0 million pre-abnormals net profit for the year to June 30, 1996.
Forecasts ranged from A$97.0 million to A$102.3 million, compared with the A$97.3 million profit posted in 1994/95.
"There'll be a big impact from the grain prices in the second half and going into the first half of this (1996/97 year)," another Sydney analyst said, estimating extra grain costs of about A$60 million.  
But analysts expected the cost of grain, a major input in Goodman's breadmaking and chicken operations, would ease back later in calendar 1996.
The higher grain costs were likely to have been offset somewhat in the second half of 1995/96 by lower packaging and palm oil costs, some analysts said.
Profit expectations are in a tight band in part because of Goodman's own comments about the result in early August.
Goodman chief executive David Hearn said then that the pre-abnormal profit would be around A$100 million.  
"We're saying that there will be a small increase in pre-abnormal profit in the 0-5 percent range from last year and since we made A$97 million last year, zero to five means somewhere between A$97 and A$102 million," Hearn said.
Goodman then also announced it would post abnormal losses of up to A$75 million in 1995/96, including a revaluation of its loss-making poultry operations.
This would produce a net profit after abnormals of around A$25 million, Hearn said then.  
Analysts said however most of the interest would be centred on Goodman's strategic plans for recovery from its profit slump of recent years.
Goodman Fielder shares closed down a cent at A$1.31 on Wednesday.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Transport and logistics group TNT Ltd said on Wednesday it was well placed for quite strong profit growth in the current 1996/97 year, but would continue to look at selling its currently unprofitable non-core assets.
"We haven't got any numbers, but it should be quite strong relative to the position we're starting from," TNT Managing Director David Mortimer said of prospective profit growth, in an interview with Reuters.  
Mortimer said the non-core activities that slowed down TNT's earnings in 1995/96 were its general freight business in Australia and its Brazilian operations.
"We've dealt with the LCL (Less Than Container Load) business -- that's been closed and we've sold Brazil," he said.
"What's the saying...when in doubt shoot it or fix it."
TNT would also look to sell other unprofitable non-core businesses, Mortimer said.
"We've got other non-core activities and to the extent that they don't perform then they will be vulnerable to sale," he said.  
One of those non core activities is TNT's 50 percent interest in airliner leasing firm, Ansett Worldwide. News Corp Ltd owns the other half.
Mortimer said he had consistently said that Ansett Worldwide's capital base needed to be restructured to give it cheaper access to capital so it could compete properly.
"In its present structure, it's difficult for it to be optimised for News and TNT ownership because it needs access to capital at an effective rate," he said.
News and TNT continued to look at ways of restructuring Ansett Worldwide's capital base before selling it, he said.  
Ansett's GD Express operation based in Europe had turned around in the last year and was now going well, Mortimer said.
He said the just completed sale plans for Ansett Airlines
Mortimer said in the longer term, TNT aimed to get double digit revenue and earnings growth.
"Overall we'd like to do good double digit (revenue and earnings) growth, but we can't guarantee any of that," he said.
TNT's share price closed up three cents at A$1.47.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Global media group News Corp Ltd must report a sharply stronger second quarter profit this Thursday or it will fail to achieve its 20 percent growth target for the 1996/97 year, analysts said.
News Corp is expected to report a second quarter net profit before abnormals of between A$450 million and A$490 million, taking first half net profits to between A$735 million and A$775 million.  
This compares with A$285 million in the first quarter and would be up 17 percent from the A$663 million posted in the first half of 1995/96.
Analysts said strong receipts from the box-office hit "Independence Day" and firm U.S. television revenue would be the driving factors in the stronger result.
They said the market was demanding that News put out a strong second quarter figure after a series of below-expectation results.  
News' first half must be around 15 to 20 percent better if Rupert Murdoch's group is to achieve its August 1996 forecast of a 20 percent improvement in profits in 1996/97 from the A$1.26 billion achieved in 1995/96.
"They are going to have to get a move on in this quarter if they're going to achieve that 20 percent," said one senior News Corp analyst.
"If they can't get a decent rise for the quarter, people are going to panic," the analyst said.  
Analysts said they expected revenues from Australian newspapers and magazines and the Ansett airline operation to remain weak in the second quarter.
First Pacific analyst Lachlan Drummond said he expected Independence Day revenues to be the major factor in the stronger result.
"Television is also one area where there's room for some upside," Drummond said. He is forecasting A$474 million for the second quarter.  
Analysts also said a good result was likely because News was due to give a big presentation to analysts and investors on February 24 in Los Angeles and would be reluctant to disappoint them immediately before that.
"That's got everyone believing that they won't have a bad result," Drummond said.
The market would also watch the results commentary closely for a repeat of the 20 percent growth forecast.
Executive chairman and founder Rupert Murdoch repeated the forecast in October last year at the group's annual meeting in Adelaide.  
But analysts said company officials had been reluctant to repeat the forecast since then.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
Global media group News Corp Ltd must report a sharply higher second quarter profit on Thursday or it will fail to achieve its 20 percent growth target for the 1996/97 year, analysts said.
News Corp is expected to report a second quarter net profit before abnormals of between A$450 million (US$344.25 million) and A$490 million, taking first half net profits to between A$735 million and A$775 million.
This compares with A$285 million in the first quarter and would be up 17 percent from the A$663 million posted in the first half of 1995/96.
Analysts said strong receipts from the box-office hit alien movie "Independence Day" and firm U.S. television revenue would be the driving factors in the stronger result.
They said the market was demanding News put out a strong second quarter figure after a series of below-expectation results.
The analysts said the extent of any fall in the price of News Corp shares would depend on how far earnings fell short of expectations but they did not quantify any expected drop.  
News' first half must be around 15 to 20 percent better if Rupert Murdoch's group is to achieve its August 1996 forecast of a 20 percent improvement in profits in 1996/97 from the A$1.26 billion achieved in 1995/96.
"They are going to have to get a move on in this quarter if they're going to achieve that 20 percent," said one senior analyst on Tuesday.
"If they can't get a decent rise for the quarter, people are going to panic," the analyst told Reuters.
Analysts said they expected revenues from Australian newspapers and magazines and the Ansett airline operation to remain weak in the second quarter.
First Pacific analyst Lachlan Drummond said he expected "Independence Day" revenues to be the major factor in the stronger result.
"Television is also one area where there's room for some upside," Drummond said. He is forecasting A$474 million for the second quarter.
Analysts also said a good result was likely because News was due to give a big presentation to analysts and investors on February 24 in Los Angeles and would be reluctant to disappoint them before that.  
"That's got everyone believing that they won't have a bad result," Drummond said.
The market would also watch the results commentary closely for a repeat of the 20 percent growth forecast.
Executive chairman and founder Rupert Murdoch repeated the forecast in October last year at the group's annual meeting in Adelaide. But analysts said company officials had been reluctant to repeat the forecast since then.  
News Corp shares ended one cent higher at A$6.75 on Tuesday
(A$1=US$0.76)
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp on Thursday reported a lower than expected profit for the first half of 1996/97, but later told analysts it remained confident of a 20 percent profit boost for the full year.
Strong earnings from the hit movie Independence Day and buoyant British newspaper sales helped drive net profits before abnormals 10.3 percent higher to A$731 million (US$555 million).
But the result was below analyst forecasts of a pre-abnormals profit of A$735 million to A$775 million.
"Everyone's a bit disappointed," said a Sydney analyst.
Andrew Sekely, the head of equities at broker Intersuisse, said: "It certainly wasn't a startingly good result. The market has made its judgement". News' shares fell 16 cents to A$6.60 after the result, but closed in Australia at A$6.76.
"It's about A$20 million less than what the market would have liked and to still reach that (20 percent profit growth) outlook, it's got to make up the difference in the second half," the Sydney analyst said.
News Corp had said in August last year when it posted a A$1.26 billion net profit for the year to June 30, 1996 that it expected strong movie and television revenues to increase profits by at least 20 percent in 1996/97.
News Corp told analysts in a teleconference briefing on Thursday after the first half result that it still expected 20 percent profit growth for 1996/97.
"They did say that they're still on track for the 20 percent growth," another Sydney media analyst said after the briefing between company officials and U.S. and Australian analysts.
Analysts said News Corp officials were bullish about catching up in the second half and had pointed to a strong outlook for movies and U.S. television and newspapers.
Operating income from News' Fox Filmed Entertainment unit surged to A$202 million for the first half of 1996/97 from A$84 million a year earlier, due largely to Independence Day.
Analysts said the re-release of Star Wars and other films would help further boost movie revenues in the second half.
British newspaper profits rose 18 percent in the first half, with gains in circulation revenues at The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times, News Corp said.
"All of the company's newspapers have maintained their dominant position in each of their respective markets, despite cover price increases instituted during the quarter at both The Sun and The Times," the company said. Analysts said British newspapers would again perform well in the second half.
In contrast, Australian newspapers posted only a slight increase in profit in the first half reflecting a slow economy.
While News Corp said losses at its burgeoning Asian satellite broadcaster Star TV in the first half were in line with expectations. (A$=US$0.76)
Rupert Murdoch's News Corp on Thursday reported a lower than expected profit for the first half of 1996/97, but later told analysts it remained confident of a 20 percent profit boost for the full year.
Strong earnings from the hit movie Independence Day and buoyant British newspaper sales helped drive net profits before abnormals 10.3 percent higher to A$731 million (US$561 million).
Abnormal losses of A$41 million cut final first half profits down to A$690 million from A$702 million a year earlier.
But the result was below analyst forecasts of a pre-abnormals profit of A$735 million to A$775 million.
"Everyone's a bit disappointed," said a Sydney analyst.
Andrew Sekely, the head of equities at broker Intersuisse, described the result as moderate.
"It certainly wasn't a startingly good result. The market has made its judgement," Sekely said. News' shares fell 16 cents to A$6.60 after the result, but closed in Australia at A$6.76.
"It's about A$20 million less than what the market would have liked and to still reach that (20 percent profit growth) outlook, it's got to make up the difference in the second half," the Sydney analyst said.
News Corp had said in August last year when it posted a A$1.26 billion net profit for the year to June 30, 1996 that it expected strong movie and television revenues to increase profits by at least 20 percent in 1996/97.
Murdoch repeated the forecast in October, but the group has been publicly tight-lipped about it since then and its first quarter results were also lower than expected.
However, News Corp reassured the analysts in a teleconference briefing after the first half result, saying that it still expected 20 percent profit growth for 1996/97.
"They did say that they're still on track for the 20 percent growth," another Sydney media analyst said after the briefing between company officials and U.S. and Australian analysts.
Analysts said News Corp officials were bullish about catching up in the second half and had pointed to a strong outlook for movies and U.S. television and newspapers.
Operating income from News' Fox Filmed Entertainment unit surged to A$202 million for the first half of 1996/97 from A$84 million a year earlier, due largely to Independence Day.
Analysts said the re-release of Star Wars and other films would help further boost movie revenues in the second half.
Sharply lower television profits in the first half because of lower ratings from News' Fox television network and higher programming costs surprised analysts.
But analysts expect a rebound in revenues from Fox television in the second half due to a successful Super Bowl broadcast and the new hit animated comedy King of the Hill.
British newspaper profits rose 18 percent in the first half, with gains in circulation revenues at The Sun, the Times and The Sunday Times, News Corp said.
"All of the company's newspapers have maintained their dominant position in each of their respective markets, despite cover price increases instituted during the quarter at both The Sun and The Times," the company said.
Analysts said British newspapers would again perform well in the second half. "Regardless of what's happening with volumes and prices, which are looking quite good, the relative position on paper prices is improving," said First Pacific media analyst Lachlan Drummond.
In contrast, Australian newspapers posted only a slight increase in prodit in the first half reflecting a slow economy.
While News Corp said losses at its burgeoning Asian satellite broadcaster Star TV in the first half were in line with expectations. (A$=US$0.76)
Rupert Murdoch's global media group News Corp Ltd reported a lower than expected first half profit on Thursday, but later told analysts it remained confident of a 20 percent profit boost for the full year.
News said strong earnings from the hit alien movie Independence Day and buoyant U.K. newspaper sales helped drive up net profits before abnormals 10.3 percent to A$731 million.
But this was below analysts' expectations of a pre-abnormals net profit for the half of A$735 million to A$775 million.  
"Everyone's a bit disappointed," said one senior Sydney analyst who asked not to be named.
Andrew Sekely, the head of equities at broker Intersuisse, described the result as moderate.
"It certainly wasn't a startingly good result. The market has made its judgment," he said. News' shares fell 16 cents to A$6.60 in the hours after the result.
"It's about A$20 million less than what the market would have liked and to still reach that (20 percent profit growth) outlook, it's got to make up the difference in the second half," the Sydney analyst said.  
News had said in August last year when it posted a A$1.26 billion net profit for the year to June 30, 1996 that it expected strong movie and television revenues to increase profits by at least 20 percent in 1996/97.
Murdoch repeated the forecast in October, but the group has been publicly tight-lipped about it since then and its first quarter results were also lower than expected.
However News reassured the analysts in a teleconference briefing after the first half result, saying that it was still on track for the 20 percent profit growth.
The profit forecast was not in the formal release.  
"They did say that they're still on track for the 20 percent growth," another Sydney media analyst said after the morning teleconference briefing between company officials and U.S. and Australian analysts.
Analysts said News Corp officials were bullish about catching up in the second half and had pointed to the continued strong outlook for movies, U.S. television and newspapers.
Operating income from News' Fox Filmed Entertainment unit surged to A$202 million for the first half from A$84 million a year earlier, due largely to Independence Day.  
"U.S. results were led by Fox Filmed Entertainment which posted a 154 percent gain in operating profits reflecting the continued success of Independence Day," News Corp said.
Analysts said the re-release of Star Wars, among others, would help further boost movie revenues in the second half.
"It's pure profit in the second half, whereas they had costs to write off in the first half," said another analyst.
Strong revenues from News' Fox television network and its Fox stations would also help second half profits.
"They did very well over the Super Bowl and they've got a new hit with King of the Hill," said an analyst.  
U.K. newspapers would again perform well in the second half, analysts said. British newspaper profits rose 18 percent in the first half, with gains in circulation revenues at The Sun, the Times and The Sunday Times.
"All of the company's newspapers have maintained their dominant position in each of their respective markets, despite cover price increases instituted during the quarter at both The Sun and The Times," News said.
News said losses at its burgeoning Asian satellite broadcaster Star TV were in line with expectations but no figures were released. -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
