Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo has filed a lawsuit against Beijing authorities for sending him to a labour camp without trial, his wife said on Tuesday.
Liu urged Beijing's Xuanwu District Court to overturn a decision by the Beijing Re-education through Labour Committee to send him to a labour camp for three years.
"I refuse to accept the decision," Liu said in his suit, a copy of which was made available to Reuters.
"I am appealing...not out of fear of losing freedom...but to defend my right to freedom of speech as a law-abiding citizen," the 41-year-old dissident said.
Police detained Liu, a renowned literary critic and prominent dissident, in September and sent him to a camp in the northeastern city of Dalian to serve three years of re-education through labour.
Re-education through labour is a form of administrative punishment that can be imposed by authorities while avoiding the court system.
Western human rights activists say re-education through labour is increasingly favoured as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications or publicity of a trial.
The dissident's wife, Liu Xia, told Reuters that the court had agreed to hear the suit though no date had been set.
Court officials declined to comment.
Authorities at the labour camp had rejected requests by Liu's family to visit him, his wife said.
"They (authorities) told his father that his performance was not good," Liu's wife said in an interview.
She said she held little hope of winning the suit.
The Re-education through Labour Committee accused Liu Xiaobo of "concocting stories, distorting facts, libelling and sullying the government, stirring up trouble and disturbing social order".
It said the alleged offences were committed in a petition to the government and a newspaper article written by Liu for a Taiwan newspaper.
In the government petition made last year, Liu and dozens of other intellectuals urged the government to reassess the June 1989 military crackdown on student-led demonstrations for democracy.
"Liu...was warned several times but was unrepentant and continued to engage in lawbreaking and criminal activities," said a document issued by the committee.
In the months before his incarceration, Liu orchestrated several daring, open letters to the government.
On September 30, Liu and another dissident, Wang Xizhe, issued a statement calling for the indictment and impeachment of Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin.
The pair demanded Jiang's resignation for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang fled to the United States in October.
Last week, Beijing's Chaoyang District Court rejected the lawsuit of another dissident, Liu Nianchun, against a similar labour camp term.
China dismisses international criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Chinese authorities have dealt crushing blows to the tiny democracy movement in recent months. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are in prison or labour camp.
China's propaganda machine on Thursday hailed the selection of Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive as the beginning of "true democracy" in the territory.
"This is a day to be remembered in Hong Kong's democratic development," the China Daily said of the choice of shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa as chief executive-designate of post-colonial Hong Kong.
"It is...the beginning of Hong Kong's true democracy," the official newspaper said in a commentary.
Tung was elected on Wednesday by a 400-member Selection Committee -- its members hand-picked by Beijing -- making him the territory's leader-in-waiting.
He will formally take up the job when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, 1997, ending more than 150 years of British rule.
Major Chinese newspapers splashed across their front page news of Tung's election and a picture of the bespectacled tycoon smiling and waving with his wife by his side.
The newspapers carried a commentary by the official Xinhua news agency, which trumpeted Hong Kong-style democracy as "totally new, that is different from the mainland as well as different from the West".
"We can see that Hong Kong is establishing a democratic way that is based on law, open, fair, civilised and proceeding in an orderly way and step by step," Xinhua said.
China, angered at Western-style democratic reforms introduced by Hong Kong's outgoing Governor Chris Patten, has vowed to dismantle the territory's elected Legislative Council after the handover and install an appointed legislature.
Xinhua took a swipe at Britain, saying: "In the past 100 years, there has been no democracy in Hong Kong's political life under Britain's rule."
"All powers, including executive, legislative, judicial and military rights, were granted to the Hong Kong governors, who were appointed by Britain without consulting the local people," Xinhua said.
"It is China's resumption of the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong...that offers Hong Kong the unprecedented opportunity for its democratic development," it said.
Xinhua urged China's rival, Taiwan, to return to the fold.
"Resuming sovereignty over Hong Kong...is the first step of the Chinese nation's great undertaking to realise reunification of the motherland under the leadership of the Communist Party," Xinhua said.
It said Wednesday's elections were vital to reunification with Taiwan under the "one country, two systems" formula, in which the island, like Hong Kong, would enjoy a great degree of autonomy and be allowed to maintain its capitalist system.
Beijing and Taipei have been political rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. Taiwan's Nationalist rulers say they are committed to reunification, but only under Western-style democracy.
The political waters ahead could be choppy for the shipping tycoon.
"People will be watching what happens to Anson Chan," a Western diplomat in Beijing said.
Tung has said he would like to keep Chan as chief secretary, but her past defence of Patten's democratic reforms could make things awkward if she decides to stay on.
"She'll have to preside over many policies that she has opposed," the diplomat said. "People want to see how she manages this."
China's Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin, in a renewed overture to rival Taiwan, urged the island not to set up new obstacles to ties, major Chinese newspapers said on Friday.
"The Taiwan authorities...must not artificially set up new obstacles," Jiang was quoted as saying on Thursday, one day after the election of the first post-colonial chief executive of Hong Kong. He did not elaborate.
Hong Kong is due to revert to China at midnight on June 30, 1997 after 150 years of British rule.
Jiang took the occasion of the naming of Hong Kong's future chief executive to urge Taiwan to return to the fold.
"Completing reunification of the motherland is the will of the people and an historical inevitability," Jiang said.
Major newspapers carried the full text of Jiang's speech.
Beijing and Taipei have been rivals since Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops lost the Chinese civil war to the communists and fled into exile on the island in 1949.
The end of the Chiang dynasty in 1988 and the rise of Taiwan's first native-born president, Lee Teng-hui, has brought Western-style democracy -- anathema to Beijing's communists -- to Taiwan.
Beijing suspects Lee is trying to push Taiwan towards independence. Taiwan denies any independence ambitions and says it is still committed to reunification, albeit under democracy and a free market economy.
Jiang renewed a call for "political talks" to iron out differences and pave the way for reunification.
He said forces clamouring for Taiwan's independence threatened peaceful reunification.
"The Communist Party of China... will not allow any person, any force to split Taiwan from the motherland," Jiang said.
China has threatened to invade if Taiwan declared independence. It held war games and missile tests near the island in March in the run-up to its first direct presidential elections, which Lee won by a landslide.
"Our determination is unwavering," Jiang said in a speech to mark the 60th anniversary of the kidnapping of Chiang Kai-shek in the ancient capital of Xian.
Chang Hsueh-liang, dubbed the "young marshal," abducted Chiang Kai-shek 60 years ago to force him to fight invading Japanese troops instead of focusing on his rivalry with the communists.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation, but Taipei has continued to flirt with Beijing's allies.
Fiji President Kamisese Mara arrived in Taiwan on Thursday for a six-day official visit.
Beijing scored a big victory in its quest to isolate Taiwan when South Africa said in November it would switch recognition to Beijing from Taipei by the end of 1997.
Qiao Shi, chairman of China's National People's Congress, or parliament, called for the early normalisation of relations between China and South Africa during a meeting with a visiting delegation of the African National Congress on Thursday, the Xinhua news agency said.
China has pledged to open its insurance, stock, retail, wholesale and banking sectors to foreign investment as part of a drive for long-delayed entry to the World Trade Organisation.
"From 1997-2000, China is expected to open its insurance and stock market wider to foreign investment," the China Daily said Sunday, quoting Ma Jixian, an official of the State Economic and Trade Commission under the cabinet.
The pledge was contained in a unilateral action plan submitted by China to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in the Philippines last month, the newspaper said.
Before the end of the decade, foreign insurers would have access to markets outside Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, Ma said without elaborating.
China's insurance market was once virtually monopolised by the state-owned People's Insurance Group but the sector has gradually opened up to domestic as well as foreign competition.
Only three foreign insurers are able to write insurance policies in China, including American International Assurance Co. Ltd, a part of the American International Group Inc.
The others are Japan's Tokio Marine and Fire Insurance Co. Ltd and which has a life insurance joint venture with a domestic insurer.
Ma, one of China's representatives at the APEC summit, said foreign stock companies would be allowed to handle A shares, whose availability is still confined to native Chinese. He gave no further details.
Currently, foreign investors are restricted to buying B shares, while Chinese nationals can only buy A shares.
In its action plan, China also pledged to cut its average import tariffs to about 15 percent from the current 23 percent.
The tariffs would be reduced futher in subsequent years, Ma said without going into details.
"A majority of non-tariff measures will have been abolished by 2010 and all those incompatible with World Trade Organisation rules will have been erased by 2020," Ma said.
China has pushed to gain entry to the WTO on the favourable terms of a developing nation, but Western countries, particularly the United States, have insisted its economy is too big for such preferential treatment.
According to the action plan, China would allow foreign banks to open more operational outfits in 24 Chinese cities and launch pilot bases where foreign banks can conduct yuan business, the newspaper said.
In the first decade of the next century, foreign banks would be allowed to expand their presence beyond the current 24 pilot cities and more pilot bases would be available for them to conduct yuan business, it said.
China would let overseas retailers establish more joint venture or cooperative retailing chains in areas beyond the 11 pilot cities currently allowed, the newspaper said.
The liberalisation would cover all provincial capitals and major economic cities by the year 2010, the newspaper said, adding that foreign retailers would be free to open outlets in China by 2020.
Foreign investors would be allowed larger stakes in China's power sector and have greater access to China's river, marine and road transportation if Beijing becomes a member of the WTO, it said.
China would further open its tourism sector, allowing joint venture travel agencies in five cities on an experimental basis over the next three years, the newspaper said.
China said on Sunday its soaring stock markets were overheating on widespread speculation and warned of a crash similar to the great Wall Street collapse of 1929.
"Currently, China's stock markets are overheated, making us associate it with the U.S. stock disaster in 1929," the official People's Daily newspaper said in a commentary, issued in advance of its Monday edition by the Xinhua news agency.
China's foreign currency B share market in Shanghai soared by about 80 percent between November 11 and December 10 while the bourse in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen rose by about 100 percent before sharp falls in the final days of last week.
The Shanghai B-share market plunged 12.26 percent on Friday while its Shenzhen counterpart dived 14.75 percent. The Shanghai A-share index lost 5.51 percent and Shenzhen 4.84 percent.
"The stock markets have entered a very abnormal situation fraught with increasing market risk," said the commentary.
Anticipating sharp falls in the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets in response to the article in the People's Daily, which is the mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, the commentary said: "The government... will never step in to help the markets when they slump."
The commentary described speculation that the government would support the market against falls because of political considerations before the handover of Hong Kong to Beijing in mid-1997 and the Communist Party congress late next year as "very muddled".
Bank savings were "the safest and most reliable method of investment", it said in an apparent bid to talk down trading.
Last Friday, the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges announced that they were imposing a limit of 10 percent on daily movements for stocks with effect from Monday to stop extraordinary price movements.
That move was clearly intended to forestall a possible crash on Monday following the People's Daily policy announcement.
"Recent skyrocketing has been very abnormal and irrational," the commentary said. "We must further check excessive speculation.
"We must strengthen supervision and regulation."
The commentary announced a list of measures to try to rein in the bull run, saying that bank loans, for example, must not be used to speculate in stocks.
The government would increase share issues by listing more profitable medium and large state enterprises, it said.
One factor in the bull run over the past month has been a lack of shares, resulting in a large number of buyers chasing a limited supply of shares.
In addition, market irregularities have been rising this year, the commentary said.
It cited manipulation by big players, bank loans entering the market illegally, overdrafts by brokerages and misleading media reports as among reasons for the skyrocketing of the stock markets in recent weeks.
Last week, securities authorities suspended the rights of two key unidentified newspapers to release official information about listed companies because of "mistakes in reporting".
The Securities Commission announced on Sunday a quota of 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) worth of share issues for 1996. The amount was 200 percent larger than the 1995 quota, Xinhua said.
The quota, if unused by the end of 1996, could be carried over into next year. Xinhua did not specify whether the quota included foreign currency B shares and domestic A shares.
China said on Sunday it will tighten inspections of imported animals and plants next year for possible diseases after Chinese quarantine officials banned poultry imports from several U.S. states and a part of Britain.
"The country's animal and quarantine authorities will carry out stricter inspection on a wide range of goods," the China Daily Business Weekly newspaper said.
Inspections would cover imports and exports of plants, animals, fruit and agricultural goods, as well as containers, packages and other materials used to transport them, according to new regulations approved this month by the State Council, or cabinet.
Quarantine and customs officials would inspect both hand-carried items as well as goods imported or exported by traders, the newspaper said.
Pets and plants of diplomats who have diplomatic immunity would also have to be inspected, it said.
The authorities could slap fines of up to 50,000 yuan ($6,000) on violators, the newspaper said.
Agricultural officials would be on the lookout for animal and plant diseases at home and abroad, it said.
Last week, China announced a ban on poultry imports from Missouri and Oklahoma, alleging that five cases of Newcastle disease were discovered in the two U.S. states between July and September.
The United States denied the accusation and said it sought talks with China to lift the ban.
A spokeswoman for the U.S. Embassy in Beijing said the disease broke out in pet birds only, and that all the pet birds infected with the disease were destroyed.
The spokeswoman said she had no information on which U.S. states found pet birds with Newcastle disease or when the problems were discovered.
The newspaper said China banned in July poultry imports from an unidentified area of Britain it believed was affected by Newcastle disease.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza. But the ban did not go into effect after China and the United States held talks on the issue.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products.
Some 330,000 tonnes of U.S. poultry products -- worth $445 million -- were exported to China through Hong Kong last year, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day, 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China, the council said.
Beijing and Washington are also at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector.
China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
Beijing said it was delaying by one month the implementation of those curbs, which had been scheduled to take effect December 10, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
China said Sunday its soaring stock markets were overheating on widespread speculation and warned of a crash similar to the great Wall Street collapse of 1929.
"Currently, China's stock markets are overheated, making us associate it with the U.S. stock disaster in 1929," the official People's Daily newspaper said in a commentary, issued in advance of its Monday edition by the Xinhua news agency.
China's foreign currency B share market in Shanghai soared by about 80 percent between Nov. 11 and Dec. 10, while the bourse in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen rose by about 100 percent before sharp falls in the final days of last week.
The Shanghai B-share market plunged 12.26 percent on Friday while its Shenzhen counterpart dived 14.75 percent. The Shanghai A-share index lost 5.51 percent and Shenzhen 4.84 percent.
"The stock markets have entered a very abnormal situation fraught with increasing market risk," the commentary said.
Anticipating sharp falls in the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets in response to the article in the People's Daily, which is the mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, the commentary said: "The government ... will never step in to help the markets when they slump."
The commentary described speculation that the government would support the market against falls because of political considerations before the handover of Hong Kong to Beijing in mid-1997 and the Communist Party congress late next year as "very muddled."
Bank savings were "the safest and most reliable method of investment," it said in an apparent bid to talk down trading.
Last Friday, the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges announced that they were imposing a limit of 10 percent on daily movements for stocks with effect from Monday to stop extraordinary price movements.
That move was clearly intended to forestall a possible crash on Monday following the People's Daily policy announcement.
"Recent skyrocketing has been very abnormal and irrational," the commentary said. "We must further check excessive speculation. We must strengthen supervision and regulation."
The commentary announced a list of measures to try to rein in the bull run, saying that bank loans, for example, must not be used to speculate in stocks.
The government would increase share issues by listing more profitable medium and large state enterprises, it said.
One factor in the bull run over the past month has been a lack of shares, resulting in a large number of buyers chasing a limited supply of shares.
In addition, market irregularities have been rising this year, the commentary said.
It cited manipulation by big players, bank loans entering the market illegally, overdrafts by brokerages and misleading media reports as among reasons for the skyrocketing of the stock markets in recent weeks.
Last week securities authorities suspended the rights of two key unidentified newspapers to release official information about listed companies because of "mistakes in reporting."
The Securities Commission Sunday announced a quota of 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) worth of share issues for 1996. The amount was 200 percent larger than the 1995 quota, Xinhua said.
The quota, if unused by the end of 1996, could be carried over into next year. Xinhua did not specify whether the quota included foreign currency B shares and domestic A shares.
China has pledged to edge open its insurance, stock, retail, wholesale and banking sectors to foreign investment as part of a drive for long-delayed entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
"From 1997-2000, China is expected to open its insurance and stock market wider to foreign investment," the China Daily said on Sunday, quoting Ma Jixian, an official of the State Economic and Trade Commission under the cabinet.
The pledge was contained in a unilateral action plan submitted by China to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in the Philippines last month, the newspaper said.
Before the end of the decade, foreign insurers would have access to markets outside Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, Ma said without elaborating.
China's insurance market was once virtually monopolised by the state-owned People's Insurance Group but the sector has gradually opened up to domestic as well as foreign competition.
Only three foreign insurers are able to write insurance policies in China, including American International Assurance Co Ltd, a part of the American International Group Inc.
The others are Japan's Tokio Marine and Fire Insurance Co Ltd and which has a life insurance joint venture with a domestic insurer.
Ma, one of China's representatives at the APEC summit, said foreign stock companies would be allowed to handle A shares, whose availability is still confined to native Chinese. He gave no further details.
Currently, foreign investors are restricted to buying B shares, while Chinese nationals can only buy A shares.
In its action plan, China also pledged to cut its average import tariffs to about 15 percent from the current 23 percent.
The tariffs would be reduced futher in subsequent years, Ma said without going into details.
"A majority of non-tariff measures will have been abolished by 2010 and all those incompatible with World Trade Organisation rules will have been erased by 2020," Ma said.
China has pushed to gain entry to the WTO on the favourable terms of a developing nation, but Western countries, particularly the United States, have insisted its economy is too big for such preferential treatment.
According to the action plan, China would allow foreign banks to open more operational outfits in 24 Chinese cities and launch pilot bases where foreign banks can conduct yuan business, the newspaper said.
In the first decade of the next century, foreign banks would be allowed to expand their presence beyond the current 24 pilot cities and more pilot bases would be available for them to conduct yuan business, it said.
China would let overseas retailers establish more joint venture or cooperative retailing chains in areas beyond the 11 pilot cities currently allowed, the newspaper said.
The liberalisation would cover all provincial capitals and major economic cities by the year 2010, the newspaper said, adding that foreign retailers would be free to open outlets in China by 2020.
Foreign investors would be allowed larger stakes in China's power sector and have greater access to China's river, marine and road transportation if Beijing becomes a member of the WTO, it said.
China would further open its tourism sector, allowing joint venture travel agencies in five cities on an experimental basis over the next three years, the newspaper said.
Chinese police have detained veteran dissident Wang Donghai amid accusations by Amnesty International that those who dare to speak up face torture, imprisonment and even death at the hands of the government.
Police in Hangzhou, capital of the eastern province of Zhejiang, told Wang's family that Wang would be sent to a "study class", a euphemism for coercive ideological reform, his sister, Wang Yisu, told Reuters on Saturday.
Two public security officers took Wang away on Friday but would not say why Wang was being sent to a study class -- a holdover from the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution -- or say when he would be released, the sister said.
Police would not let Wang's family meet him or say where he was being held, the sister said.
The sister said she suspected police detained her brother because he was trying to help fellow dissident Chen Longde, who jumped from a third-floor window on August 17 because he could no longer stand being beaten by a prison official.
Chen suffered serious injuries and was taken to hospital after the fall.
"I think it (Wang's detention) had to do with Chen Longde ... My brother was angry, shocked and surprised when he heard about what happened to Chen Longde," the sister said in a telephone interview.
"My brother and Chen Longde were very close," she said.
Hangzhou police could not be reached for immediate comment.
Wang, 45, and Chen, 39, were ordered last month to serve one year and three years of "re-education through labour", respectively, but Wang was released because of poor health.
Re-education through labour is an administrative punishment with a maximum of three years that can be imposed by police without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Wang, a veteran of the 1979 Democracy Wall movement, was jailed for two years for organising street protests after armed forces crushed pro-democracy demonstrations by students at Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, with heavy loss of life.
Western diplomats say Chinese authorities appear to be using administrative punishment more frequently to take dissidents out of circulation without having to go through a more complicated judicial process to impose criminal sentences.
London-based human rights group Amnesty International criticised China's human rights record. "The Chinese authorities do not tolerate any form of dissent," Amnesty said.
"They allow torture to continue, use the death penalty to try to cure social problems, brutally crack down on ethnic groups calling peacefully for more independence and detain hundreds of thousands of people every year without charging them with any crime," it added.
"When China's rulers refuse to respect fundamental human rights, they set a precedent for repressive governments worldwide. When they argue that local conditions and economic necessity mean human rights must take second place, their words are echoed by governments through the Asia-Pacific region."
A commentary by the official Xinhua news agency earlier this year said that a plot by the West to force its human rights standards and values on other countries was doomed to failure.
In April, China quashed a resolution drafted by the United States and the European Union to avert censure at the United Nations Human Rights Commission for the sixth year in a row.
China has jailed dozens of dissidents this year amid Beijing's obsession with stability coupled with easing foreign pressure on its human rights record, human rights groups and diplomats said on Wednesday.
Authorities have jailed 12 better-known dissidents or sent them to labour camps in the past year, the Hong Kong-based Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
At least 10 lesser-known political activists have been incarcerated in the northern region of Inner Mongolia, Liu Qing, chairman of the New York-based Human Rights in China, said in a telephone interview.
In the southwestern city of Guiyang, another seven to eight dissidents have been jailed, Liu said. He declined to elaborate on the cases pending verification of details.
"A lot more dissidents were jailed this year than in previous years," Liu said. "There are not many prominent dissidents left."
Liu, who served 10 years in prison for his role in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement and left for the United States in 1992, attributed the tougher policy on dissent to an easing of foreign pressure on China.
"International pressure on China's human rights is easing and disappearing," he said.
"This undoubtedly is tantamount to telling the Chinese Communists that the Chinese government can go all out and persecute dissidents," Liu said.
The United States delinked human rights from its annual review of renewing Most Favoured Nation trading status for China in 1994. Many business-minded Western governments have been accused of turning a blind eye to human rights abuses in China.
Of the 12 better-known dissidents to be locked up this year, former student leader Wang Dan received the harshest sentence -- 11 years -- for conspiring to subvert the government.
A Beijing court took just 10 minutes last month to reject an appeal by Wang, a leader of student-led demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Another nine dissidents, including Liu Qing's younger brother Liu Nianchun, were ordered to serve up to three years of re-education through labour.
Labour re-education is an administrative punishment that can be imposed by authorities without recourse to the judiciary.
Western human rights activists say re-education through labour is increasingly favoured as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications or publicity of a trial.
Another dissident serving time at a labour camp, Chen Longde, jumped from a third-floor window in a suicide attempt in August because he could not tolerate alleged beating by prison guards, family members said. Prison officials deny the charge.
Two dissidents fled to the United States this year -- former student leader Liu Gang and veteran dissident Wang Xizhe.
Obsession with stability was another factor in China intensifying its crackdown on dissent, diplomats said.
"The government is obsessed with matters of stability at the moment and all the more so because the 15th party congress is around the corner," a Western diplomat said, referring to the crucial five-yearly meeting due late next year.
"In the eyes of the leadership, dissidents represent a potential threat to stability and social order," he said. "The leadership fears that treating them leniently would only encourage others to challenge the authority of the party."
China dismisses international criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
A Chinese court on Thursday rejected a plea of insanity by a bank robber and sentenced him to death, along with two accomplices, for a string of heists that shocked Beijing.
In a rare move, officials allowed foreign reporters to watch the court proceedings against Guo Song and seven accessories, apparently to trumpet the success of a crackdown on crime launched this year.
The stocky Guo appeared unrepentant, his face set and defiant, as he was led from the courtroom by two policemen after the Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court convicted him of robbing three bank cash delivery vans this year.
"The court does not believe or accept defendant Guo Song's plea of insanity," the presiding judge said in his verdict.
"After psychiatric tests, Guo Song was found to have total control over his mental faculties and was responsible for his actions during the crime," said the judge, whose name was not available.
The 32-year-old defendant, dressed in a beige jacket and dark blue trousers, did not speak during the 20-minute hearing. He has two weeks in which to file an appeal to the Higher People's Court.
The presiding judge stood to read the verdict against the eight defendants lined up in front of him and each flanked by two police officers who held their arms at their sides.
Guo, who had previously served a four-year term for rape, was found guilty of three bank robberies in Beijing in February, June and August this year, and of shooting dead four bank guards.
The robberies shocked the Chinese capital, where bank heists had been unheard of since the 1949 communist takeover.
The court sentenced two co-defendants to death for selling firearms to Guo.
A fourth defendant was given a death sentence suspended for two years and a fifth was sentenced to life imprisonment for selling firearms.
Three others, including Zhang Ying, 25, were sentenced to prison terms of up to seven years for harbouring a criminal. Zhang was the lone woman among the defendants.
Police tracked down Guo last September after police detained an accomplice of Guo's in the robberies, Lu Xianzhou, while he was driving a stolen car, state media reported.
Lu confessed to robbing the cash delivery vans and customers of banks and led police to Guo. It was not known if Lu has been sentenced.
Police had recovered six guns, 350 rounds of ammunition and part of the stolen cash -- 170,000 yuan ($20,000), 610,000 Japanese yen ($5,000) and $18,000.
Hundreds of thousands of people have been arrested and several thousand executed since China launched its Strike Hard crackdown against crime last April.
Crime, virtually eliminated after the communists swept to power in 1949, has staged a comeback in the past two decades, springing up along with economic reforms that have loosened central controls while opening up opportunities for abuse of power.
Illegal possession of firearms and gunrunning are widespread in China. The crime rate has soared, and 395 policemen were killed in the line of duty in 1995.
A top Beijing official said on Monday the city's former Communist Party boss Chen Xitong could be punished for dereliction of duty in a further disgrace for an official who was once among China's most influential men.
However, more than a year of investigation into the man who presided over China's capital for most of the 1980s had uncovered no evidence of more serious wrongdoing, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa told reporters at a reception.
"He (Chen) is living very comfortably," the vice-mayor said.
Chen was being held outside Beijing, pending completion of an investigation, Zhang said, but declined to give details. Hong Kong newspapers have reported that Chen was under house arrest in Inner Mongolia.
Chen has not been seen in public since he stepped down as Beijing's Communist Party secretary in April 1995 after his protege, Vice-Mayor Wang Baosen, committed suicide after coming under investigation for corruption.
"Viewing the situation from the case of Wang Baosen, he (Chen) can't escape dereliction of duty," Zhang said, referring to what is usually an administrative punishment in China.
Zhang said the former municipal party chief, who served as mayor of Beijing during the 1980s, had accepted many expensive gifts but there was no evidence of wrongdoing in exchange.
Chen was sacked from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, becoming the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the puritan communists swept to power in 1949.
Zhang dismissed as "baseless" a Hong Kong newspaper report that Chen would be sentenced to between five and seven years in prison.
However, he signalled that the party, not prosecutors, would finally decide whether Chen would be indicted.
"It is up to the party central committee whether he is to be charged," Zhang said.
The woman who was Chen's mistress for about six years remained on the run, Zhang said. It was not known if the woman, identified as He Ping, had fled abroad, he said.
One of Chen's sons, Chen Xiaotong, former general manager of a Sino-Japanese joint venture hotel in Beijing, had been detained, Zhang said.
The case of the father was not related to that of the son, who was under investigation for corruption and accepting bribes, the vice-mayor said.
The case of Chen Xiaotong was also not related to that of another princeling, Zhou Beifang, who has received a suspended death sentence for corruption. Princelings are the sons and daughters of China's powerful ruling elite.
Chen Xitong's wife was free and not under house arrest, Zhang said.
Zhang said he and former Beijing Mayor Li Qiyan had been cleared of any wrongdoing because they had reported Chen's irregularities to the party leadership before the scandal surfaced.
Li stepped down as Beijing mayor in October and has been appointed as a vice minister of labour.
China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping is in good health, but may not be able to visit Hong Kong when the British colony reverts to Chinese rule in mid-1997, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa said on Monday.
"To my knowledge, (his health) is very good," Zhang told reporters when asked about Deng's health at a reception for diplomats and foreign journalists in Beijing.
Zhang, who is believed to be close to the Deng family, said he had not recently visited the 92-year-old architect of China's sweeping economic reforms, but said Deng was in Beijing.
Asked if Deng would visit Hong Kong for the ceremony when Beijing resumes sovereignty over the British colony at midnight on June 30, 1997, Zhang said: "He said it himself -- he will go to Hong Kong even it means in a wheelchair."
But Zhang added: "It would be difficult for him to go now. It would be disastrous for an old man in his 90s to catch cold. Catching cold would be a serious illness."
Deng oversaw the negotiations that successfully concluded in an agreement for Britain to hand back the territory it has held for 150 years. He has said repeatedly he hoped to be able to witness the historic transfer of power.
Chinese officials have said privately that Deng would not attend the handover ceremony, where his anointed successor President Jiang Zemin is expected to hold the limelight, but they hoped he would be able to visit Hong Kong afterwards.
The man who launched China's sweeping market-oriented economic reforms in 1978 and guided the nation's policies during the 1980s and into the early 1990s no longer holds public office but remains highly influential.
He has not been seen in public since early 1994 when he toured Shanghai during Chinese Lunar New Year festivities and appeared frail and halting in his movements and had difficulty speaking.
Deng's health is a matter of intense speculation in China and in neighbouring countries because his death is expected to trigger a scramble for power among those eager to succeed him as the de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
But analysts say that his death has largely been discounted and rumours of his ill-health that just 18 months ago sent Asian markets into a tailspin now generate little more than a murmur.
Deng is said to be suffering from Parkinson's disease. It is believed that he rarely leaves his closely-guarded home in a courtyard in central Beijing just behind the Forbidden City where China's emperors had ruled for centuries. Beijing has clamped an effective blackout on news about the health of the man who guided China out of the years of radical revolution espoused by Mao, dismantled much of 40 years of Stalinist-style central planning and told Chinese that "to get rich is glorious".
Officials routinely decline to answer questions about Deng's health, giving the party line that: "He is as well as can be expected for a man of his age."
However, sources close to the family say Deng is losing his ability to walk and is believed to spend most of his time in a wheelchair.
China on Tuesday introduced rules governing direct shipping links with Taiwan, ignoring a decades-old ban by the island it regards as a renegade province.
The regulations, which take effect from Tuesday, allow only wholly Chinese-owned or Taiwan-owned shipping companies or joint ventures involving Chinese or Taiwanese shipowners to sail between the two sides, Xinhua news agency said.
Hong Kong's Beijing-backed Wen Wei Po newspaper said the southeastern Chinese cities of Xiamen and Fuzhou would be the first ports to be opened to direct shipping links with Taiwan.
"The conditions for (establishing) direct shipping links are ripe," the newspaper said.
Taiwan's Nationalist government has banned direct air and shipping links with China since 1949 when Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops lost the Chinese civil war to the communists and fled to the island.
With tensions easing since the late 1980s, civilian aircraft and vessels have skirted the ban by stopping over in a third country or territory such as the British colony of Hong Kong or Portuguese-run Macau.  
Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct transport links, but Taiwanese authorities have been reluctant to lift the ban.
The Nationalists, who say they are committed to reunification with China, see direct transport links as their last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
China has threatened to invade if the island seeks independence.
Under the regulations, shipping companies must apply with the Chinese Ministry of Communications for permission to ply routes between the two sides. The rules made no mention of any need to seek approval from Taiwan authorities.
The ministry has 45 days to decide whether to allow a shipping company to sail between the two sides, according to the regulations.
The rules empower the ministry to warn and seize the unlawful income of shipping companies breaking the rules.
China has poured cold water on a proposal by Taipei to turn Taiwan's Kaohsiung into an extraterritorial port, allowing third party ships to ply routes between the two sides.  
The Taipei-based Economic Daily News said on Tuesday Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui had urged the central bank to study how to control capital outflows to China in a further bid to limit the island's economic exposure on its main rival's turf. The central bank denied the report.
Speculation that Taipei might change its China policy has mounted since Lee cautioned last week that the island's economy needed to avoid over-dependence on the mainland.
"The Chinese are not really making much progress on other fronts... They have decided to focus on the three links and apply pressure on the Taiwanese," a Western diplomat in Beijing said. The three links refer to trade, transport and mail.
On the diplomatic front, the rivalry has intensified, analysts say, with China trying hard to isolate the island and limit its contacts with other states.
Taiwan state-funded television said Vice-President Lien Chan was visiting the former Soviet republic of Ukraine,  which formally recognises Beijing. The Ukraine has denied the report.
China announced a diplomatic coup on Monday, persuading the West African nation of Niger to switch recognition to Beijing.
China warned Britain on Tuesday against challenging it in the World Court over its decision to disband Hong Kong's elected legislature when it takes back the territory in mid-1997.
"If Britain does this, this will damage Sino-British relations," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"If the British act wilfully, create troubles and do not cooperate with the Chinese side, then Sino-British relations will be damaged," Shen said when asked about Britain's threat.
Last week, British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind denounced China's plans to disband the democratically elected legislature and proposed letting the International Court of Justice in the Hague rule on the dispute.
After more than 150 years of British rule, the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people falls back under the Chinese flag at midnight on June 30, 1997, with promises from Beijing's communist leadership that almost nothing will change.
Upon the handover of Hong Kong, a Beijing-appointed provisional legislature will take over from the elected Legislative Council, reversing democratic reforms introduced by Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten over the past four years.
Patten has lashed out at the creation of the post-colonial legislature, calling its appointment by the 400-member Beijing-backed Selection Committee last week "a bizarre farce" and a "stomach-churning" process.
He has said the provisional legislature would be a "rubber stamp" chamber that would simply echo Beijing.
Spokesman Shen said matters pertaining to Hong Kong would be China's internal affairs after July 1, 1997 and warned Britain against interference.
"This will interfere in China's internal affairs," Shen said of Britain's threat. "Playing the international card is useless."
"To cooperate with China is of benefit to Britain, otherwise it will not be beneficial," he said.
Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive, 59-year-old shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, has defended China's controversial decision and lashed at Britain, saying the territory's colonial masters must "face the reality".
Tung has said it was irresponsible of Britain to threaten to take Beijing to the World Court over the interim chamber.
The controversial new body is dominated by pro-Beijing figures -- including 33 incumbent lawmakers and many politicians who lost to pro-democracy forces in the 1995 Legislative Council election, the first time all seats were filled by vote, either direct or indirect.
The Democratic Party, the favourite in last year's election with 19 of the 60 council seats, boycotted moves to create the provisional body, branding it anti-democratic.
The Provisional Legislative Council, as it will be known, is to sit from July 1 until a new legislature can be constituted by elections, set for 1998.
China vowed on Tuesday to intensify a crackdown on economic disorder in 1997, citing tax evasion, financial irregularities, smuggling and counterfeiting as some ills that cost the state billions of dollars a year.
"Basically, the situation of economic disorder still has not changed. Some problems are even considerably serious," the official People's Daily said in a commentary.
Chinese authorities uncovered tax, auditing and pricing violations valued at 161 billion yuan ($19.4 billion) in the past 11 years, or an average of 14.6 billion yuan a year, the commentary said.
"Increasing the intensity of regulating and revamping economic order has become an important mission which brooks no delay," the mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party said.
"We cannot be soft when dealing a blow to various economic crimes," the commentary said.
Tax evasion and smuggling were now rife, springing up along with market-oriented economic reforms introduced by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970s.
State media said taxpayers had evaded personal income tax worth an estimated 12 billion yuan since the tax was introduced in 1980.
Up to 60 percent of state-run or collective firms in China evaded taxes, the media said. It gave no figures.
"Many enterprises have two sets of accounting books and fabricate financial statements, budgets, sales and asset appraisal," the commentary said.
Chinese companies owed 35.7 billion yuan in industrial and commercial taxes in the first 11 months of 1996, up 72.9 percent from the year-ago period, Xinhua news agency said.
Beijing collected 563.9 billion yuan in industrial and commercial taxes in the first 11 months, up 1995 percent from the year-ago period.
Smuggling of goods, ranging from drugs to stolen cars, was rampant in China's thriving and porous coastal areas and inland border regions.
Chinese customs seized 5.6 billion yuan worth of smuggled goods in the first six months of 1996, latest figures showed. No comparative figures were available.
Cheng Xiusheng, an economist with the Development Research Centre under the cabinet, said economic disorder was inevitable as China abandoned central planning and embraced market reforms.
The authorities have reined in galloping inflation, allowing them to now turn their attention to restoring economic order, Cheng said.
"It can be said that inflation is under control... The next step is to revamp economic order," he told Reuters in a telephone interview.
The People's Daily said financial irregularities, including financial institutions paying exorbitant interest rates and extending huge loans to loss-making state-owned enterprises, have been "repeatedly banned but do not stop".
Counterfeiting and piracy were common and almost led to a trade war between China and the United States in February 1995 and June this year. China has declared war on piracy and clamped down on manufacturers of pirated compact discs.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
A Chinese court has sentenced dissident and former student leader Li Hai to nine years in prison for prying into state secrets in a trial held behind closed doors, a family member said on Tuesday.
"We're very surprised," the relative, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters by telephone.
Li had initially been charged with leaking state secrets, but his family and lawyer challenged the charges, arguing that the dissident was not a civil servant and had no access to state secrets.
The court "lacked evidence to convict (Li) of leaking state secrets. We thought he would get a lighter sentence ... (after) the charge was changed to prying into state secrets," Li's relative said.
Instead, Beijing's Chaoyang District Court sentenced Li to nine years in prison for prying into state secrets, the relative said.
"We're not convinced at all," he said.
The relative said he believed the appeal process had already started. The appeals trial was also expected to be held behind closed doors because the case involved state secrets.
"Our only hope is in the appeal," he said.
It was not clear how Li had pried into state secrets or if any other people have been arrested or charged.
The family has not been allowed to meet Li since he was detained in May 1995.
Li was first arrested in May 1990 for his role in the 1989 student demonstrations for democracy. He was released six months later and expelled from the philosophy department of the prestigious Beijing University, where he was a graduate student.
He was one of 56 signatories to a pro-democracy peace charter issued in May 1995 to coincide with the sixth anniversary of the military crackdown on the student demonstrations.
China jailed dozens of dissidents in 1996 as part of a drive for stability that followed an easing of foreign pressure over its human rights record, diplomats and activists said. Authorities jailed or sent to labour camps 12 better-known dissidents in 1996. Of the 12, former student leader Wang Dan received the harshest sentence -- 11 years -- for conspiring to subvert the government.
Western human rights activists said sending dissidents to labour camps has been increasingly favoured as a way of removing them from society without the complications or publicity of a trial.
At least 10 lesser-known political activists have been incarcerated in the northern region of Inner Mongolia. In the southwestern city of Guiyang, another seven to eight dissidents have been jailed.
At least two dissidents fled to the United States this year -- former student leader Liu Gang and veteran dissident Wang Xizhe.
Guo Song stood impassive, his arms clamped to his side by two court policemen, as a Beijing judge sentenced him to death for bank robbery after a trial in which he was presumed guilty from the start.
Guo, who killed four bank guards and stole several payrolls, could well be dead by Wednesday, January 1, when sweeping amendments to the Criminal Procedure Law go into effect.
Standing under the insignia of Chinese communist rule -- a red badge embossed with five stars -- the judge delivered the verdict on Guo during proceedings videotaped by a court clerk.
Court hearings in China resemble theatre. Verdicts may be decided beforehand and trials are little more than farce, said one judge-turned-lawyer who asked not to be identified.
"I used to think defence lawyers were laughable," he said in an interview. "The verdict had already been decided. It was purely acting like in a play. Whatever defendants or defence lawyers said does not matter."
Defendants in China have been presumed guilty before being proved innocent. Suspects can be detained almost indefinitely, and lawyers have access to the bill of indictment only days before a trial.
All this is set to change from January 1, 1997.
"It's a big improvement compared with the past," criminal law professor Qu Xinjiu said of the revisions approved by the National People's Congress, or parliament, last March.
However, some Chinese and foreign jurists wonder whether China's fledgling modern legal system will be able to implement these reforms and doubt whether defendants will have real access to a fair trial because of the poor quality of many judges, prosecutors and police.
BIG TEST NEXT YEAR
"Next year will be a big test of whether the quality of judges, prosecutors and police can keep up with judicial reforms," lawyer Li Shuguang said in an interview.
"China's judges and prosecutors are not prepared. They will need training... They will have to change their mentality."
The amendments aim to transform judges from instruments of prosecution to evaluators of evidence, jurists said.
"No one shall be convicted without a verdict pronounced by a people's court according to the law," says Article 12 of the revised law that alters the presumption of guilt.
Robin Munro of Human Rights Watch/Asia argued that the amendments do not embrace the presumption of innocence.
"It is not correct... to say that this new law has enshrined the presumption of innocence," Munro told Reuters by telephone from Hong Kong.
"It (merely) rejects the presumption of guilt," Munro said.
The amendments, however, would allow suspects to consult a lawyer after police interrogation and set a 14-1/2 month limit on the length of police detention before trial.
After January 1, 1997, prosecutors would be required to produce in court evidence they have purportedly collected.
DISSIDENTS UNLIKELY BENEFICIARIES
Critics say the new laws would benefit common criminals rather than dissidents, many of whom were swiftly locked up in 1996 to avoid the complications of the new law.
"Where dissidents are concerned it's the Communist Party leadership that decides what happens to them... The courts are just there to carry out the political decision," Munro said.
Dissidents jailed in the last year included Wang Dan, a leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the military. Wang was sentenced to 11 years in prison in November for conspiring to subvert the government.
Critics say the concept of rule by law remains alien to China, where for centuries imperial officials wielded absolute power and their word alone was tantamount to law.
Police have promised to abide by the new law, but officials concede many police and judicial officials lack basic legal expertise and operate virtually unchecked in their own fiefdoms.
Torture is commonly used by police in the countryside to extract confessions from suspects and facilitate the collection of evidence, critics say.
Evidence collected through torture can still be used in court against defendants, critics say. Suspects have no right to remain silent in China.
Critics are concerned about an entirely new section in the Criminal Procedure Law that calls for summary trials where an offence is punishable by a jail term of less than three years.
"It's a big step backwards," Munro said. "All these beautiful new rules... for presenting of evidence, cross examining of witnesses, conducting court debate... these all go out the window."
Corruption is rife and threatens actual implementation.
"Money can buy a life sentence instead of the court handing down a death sentence," the judge-turned-lawyer said.
In imperial China, executions were carried out by skinning, quartering, chopping a man in half at the waist or even decapitating an entire clan.
From January 1, 1997, the People's Republic of China adds lethal injection as a means of executing death row convicts. Currently, all executions are by firing squad.
However, more modern means of execution do not necessarily mean waning enthusiasm for capital punishment.
"Crime is worsening...and the Communist Party is obsessed with security," a Chinese political scientist who spoke on condition of anonymity said.
"The party believes in using draconian laws against disorder," the political scientist said.
With a string of new laws in recent years and thousands of executions a year, the party is clearly not squeamish.
The National People's Congress, or parliament, is debating amendments to the Criminal Law to increase the number of crimes punishable by death, Chinese jurists said. The amendments are due to be passed by a full session of parliament in March.
In the face of soaring crime, China executed at least 1,000 people in just the first two months of its "Strike Hard" anti-crime crackdown launched last April, the London-based human rights watchdog Amnesty International said. Thousands more executions may have gone unreported.
Crime, virtually eliminated in the years after the puritan communists swept to power in 1949, has staged a revival in the past two decades in the wake of liberal economic reforms. Capital punishment is one means China chooses to try to deter violence.
RISING EXECUTIONS
Amnesty International recorded 3,612 death sentences and 2,535 executions in China in 1995 compared with 2,496 death sentences and 1,791 executions in 1994. Some 300 people were executed in the United States between the re-introduction of the death penalty in 1977 and January, 1996.
"It's killing the chicken to frighten the monkey," one jurist said, quoting a Chinese proverb.
Amnesty International said the figures were believed to fall far short of the actual number of death sentences and executions.
Justice Ministry officials declined requests for an interview. Police declined to comment.
China does not publish statistics about the death penalty, saying these are a state secret.
Despite criticism from groups such as Amnesty International, capital punishment seems to be in China to stay.
"It's impossible for China to abolish the death penalty in the next 20 years," Yu Quanyu, vice-president of the China Society for Human Rights Studies, said.
The introduction of lethal injection as a means of execution was contained in amendments to the Criminal Procedure Law that took effect on January 1.
Currently, capital punishment is carried out at execution grounds with a single bullet fired at close range into the heart or back of the head with the convict kneeling, his ankles manacled and hands tied behind his back.
Chinese and foreign jurists were divided over China's motives for introducing lethal injection and allowing executions to be staged inside prisons.
"I strongly suspect...they are making it even more convenient to harvest organs from executed prisoners for transplant purposes," Robin Munro of Human Rights Watch/Asia said in a telephone interview from Hong Kong.
Medical facilities can be set up inside prisons to harvest organs, Munro said.
Chinese dissidents living in exile have accused China of timing executions of death row convicts to coincide with the need for transplants of organs, often for sale.
China vehemently denies the charge.
Chinese jurists argued that the introduction of lethal injection and allowing executions behind prison walls were intended to curb waste of police manpower -- not to mention increasing logistical difficulties in finding shooting grounds.
SUPERSTITIOUS VILLAGERS
"It is difficult to find execution grounds," another jurist said. "Superstitious villagers protest against executions on their land."
Many executions were held at military target ranges and along river banks, requiring huge police manpower to escort death row convicts and to stand guard to keep away curious onlookers.
Chinese laws do not specifically state the site of execution grounds.
Currently, death row convicts cannot be executed inside prisons because it is regarded as inhumane for other inmates to hear the sound of gunfire, jurists said.
The use of lethal injection would be quiet -- and save on manpower, they said.
But Chinese jurists were doubtful whether death row convicts would be given a choice between the bullet and lethal injection.
Chinese Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin has wooed Taiwan's ruling and opposition parties to come up with constructive suggestions on reunification of the two sides, split by civil war almost five decades ago.
"We welcome Taiwan's various political parties...to exchange views with us on relations between the two sides and on constructive suggestions about peaceful reunification," Jiang told a government advisory body on New Year's Day.
Chinese newspapers carried the full text of Jiang's speech on Thursday.
Earlier this week, Jiang made a similar overture, but he made no mention of the island's political parties, instead referring to Taiwanese from all walks of life.
Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party, which fled into exile on the island after losing the Chinese civil war in 1949, says it is committed to reunification but is in no hurry to do so. Taiwan insists on reunification under freedom and democracy and a free market economy.
The island's main opposition Democratic Progressive Party has called for "self-determination", or letting Taiwan's residents decide for themselves whether to reunify or declare independence.
China, which regards Taiwan as a rebel province, has threatened to invade if the island declares independence.
"Taiwan is our country's sacred territory," Jiang said.
"We hope the Taiwanese authorities...will stop all activities splitting the motherland and take realistic action to improve relations between the two sides," he said.
Tensions between Beijing and Taipei began to ease in the late 1980s, but relations plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a trip to the United States in a bid to break the island out of diplomatic isolation imposed by China.
Ties deteriorated further last March when China conducted war games and missile tests close to Taiwan in the run-up to the island's historic presidential elections. China frowns on Western-style democracy.
Analysts said Jiang was eager for reunification to secure his place in modern Chinese history alongside Mao Zedong, who established the People's Republic, and Deng Xiaoping, who cemented the return of the British colony of Hong Kong to Chinese rule in mid-1997.
Jiang, the anointed successor of Deng, China's 92-year-old paramount leader, is seen by some Western analysts as merely a transitional figure and he has struggled to shake off that image.
Jiang's call on Taiwan to come up with suggestions on ways to reunify could go unanswered again, one Chinese analyst said.
China has been bitter since Taiwan ignored Jiang's 1995 "eight point" proposal on reunification, in which he called for leaders of the two sides to exchange visits.
Jiang was seen by some in the military and the Communist Party as weak after his earlier call for reunification fell on deaf ears, analysts said.
His latest overture to Taiwan could backfire and be used by his political opponents to attack him, another analyst said.
China on Friday angrily denied that its worsening pollution was a threat to the world environment and accused developed countries of concocting the fallacy to monopolise global resources.
"It is rumour and sensationalism," the official China Daily said of the "China environmental threat" theory. "It is a cry that the sky is falling when a leaf flutters from a tree."
China had done more to clean up its environment than developed countries in their initial stages of industrialisation, it said.
Officials announced plans in September to spend up to 320 billion yuan ($38.6 billion) over the next five years to curb pollution and limit damage to the environment.
By last November, the Legal Daily said China had shut down almost 57,000 small polluting factories in a bid to limit environmental damage. Most of the closed enterprises produced paper, fertilisers, electroplates, or extracted sulphur.
It said more than 20,000 environment officials fanned out across China to inspect factories and close down polluting units after the State Council, or cabinet, issued an edict in August to step up environmental protection.
"It is the developed countries that should shoulder the major responsibility of the current condition of world environmental pollution," the newspaper said.
"China, at its initial stage of industrialisation, has drawn a lesson from the industrialised countries and has never been willing to sacrifice its environment to develop its economy."
Even though China's annual per capita income stood at only $400, it was committed to protecting the environment whereas developed countries only began fighting pollution when their per capita incomes hit $3,000, it said.
Factory chimneys across China spew out columns of black smoke, their pipes eject millions of tonnes of untreated waste into rivers and lakes, and a blanket of smog hides the sun above many cities as almost two decades of rapid economic growth have pushed China toward a sink-or-swim market economy.
Some of the world's highest levels of air pollution have been recorded by Chinese cities and acid rain is common.
China, a rising superpower, sees international criticism of issues ranging from its military build-up to human rights abuses as a conspiracy to contain its development.
The China Daily ran a cartoon of a man pointing a finger at a couple who were cleaning their yard and shouting: "Hey, you dirty the environment!" while smoke billowed from a chimney in his own filthy backyard.
The newspaper took a swipe at developed countries for polluting the environment, saying they were responsible for emitting 75 percent of the carbon monoxide in the atmosphere.
"The motive for concocting the amazing 'China environmental threat' fallacy is not hard to see through...It is a trick employed by some developed countries to direct people's attention away from reality and to evade their own responsibilities.
"There are those who are unwilling to see China progress and who are trying to contain its development by pointing their fingers at the world's environmental problems," it said.
"They hope to maintain the pattern of the past, in which already developed countries continue to enjoy the majority of the world's resources."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
Chinese authorities, shaken by a bombing in Lhasa last month, have tightened security across Tibet in the run-up to the Himalayan region's New Year next month, the Tibet Daily said.
"In our region, there is not a single unit or department that can sleep soundly or relax its vigilance in the struggle against separatism," Gyamco, a vice-chairman of Tibet's regional government, was quoted as saying in an edition seen in Beijing on Monday.
Authorities have launched a manhunt across Tibet and offered a reward of one million yuan ($120,000) for the arrest of those responsible for a bomb set off on Christmas Day outside city government offices in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital.
No casualties were reported, but the bomb -- the largest so far by anti-Chinese activists in the restive region -- caused widespread damage, shattering windows 100 metres (yards) away, officials have said.
Gyamco ordered all departments to be staffed round-the-clock in the run-up to the Tibetan New Year on February 8 and called for vigilance to prevent more acts of sabotage, the newspaper said in its December 28 edition.
"Our struggle against the Dalai Lama clique is an intense and complicated class struggle and an unshirkable political responsibility of leaders at all levels," Gyamco said.
China blames followers of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, for anti-Chinese unrest that erupts sporadically in the Himalayan region that borders India.
The Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign to win autonomy for his homeland, says he wants autonomy and freedom of worship in the deeply Buddhist region. He fled China into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule.
Several much smaller bombs have been been set off in Lhasa in the past two years, including one in 1995 that slightly damaged a plaque donated by Beijing and another last March outside the headquarters of the Tibet regional government.
Lhasa's Communist Party deputy secretary Hou Jianguo vowed to track down the saboteurs responsible for the Christmas Day bombing at all costs, the newspaper said.
"We are determined to solve this case as early as possible and at all costs," Hou said.
Authorities would continue a campaign to indoctrinate monks and nuns at lamaseries to be "patriotic" and pledge allegiance to the Chinese government, the official said.
Chinese officials have insisted there was little doubt that the Christmas Day blast was politically motivated and carried out by followers of the the Dalai Lama.
Last week, Tibet's government-in-exile in Dharamsala, in northern India, denied the Chinese allegation, saying the bombing could have been carried out by China as an excuse to crack down on dissent.
Tibet has been rocked in recent years by sporadic, sometimes violent, anti-Chinese unrest with monks and nuns often at the forefront of demonstrations for independence.
The exiled government says it opposes violence and remains committed to a negotiated political settlement.
Beijing's propaganda machine has accused the United States of using Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, as a tool to Westernise and break up China.
"Western countries, led by the United States, have directed the focal point of their 'Westernisation' and 'disintegration' (campaign) at China," the Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Tuesday.
"(They) have made the Dalai Lama clique their tool to implement this anti-Chinese strategy," the newspaper said, noting that the West had showered awards on the Dalai Lama, including the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989.
China has rarely singled out a country for backing the Dalai Lama, one Chinese analyst said.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained in recent years by disputes over Tibet as well as Beijing's diplomatic rival Taiwan, human rights abuses and widespread copyright piracy in China.
China blames followers of the Dalai Lama for periodic unrest in the Himalayan region bordering India.
The Dalai Lama says says he wants autonomy and freedom of worship in his deeply Buddhist homeland. He fled China into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule.
The December 30 edition of the Tibet Daily slammed Western criticism of China's human rights record in the region, saying critics "confused black with white".
"Sovereign rights are much more important than human rights," the newspaper said, quoting 92-year-old paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
"The sovereignty and security of the state should be placed first," it said.
The newspaper argued that communist rule protected the rights of the majority of Tibetans by ending slavery and raising living standards.
Tibet has been rocked in recent years by sporadic, sometimes violent, anti-Chinese unrest with monks and nuns often at the forefront of demonstrations for independence.
Chinese authorities have offered a reward of one million yuan ($120,000) for the arrest of those responsible for a bomb set off on Christmas Day outside government offices in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital.
No casualties were reported, but the bomb caused widespread damage, shattering windows 100 metres (yards) away, officials have said.
Chinese officials have said there was little doubt the blast was politically motivated and carried out by followers of the the Dalai Lama.
Last week, Tibet's government-in-exile in Dharamsala, in northern India, denied the Chinese allegation, saying the bombing could have been carried out by China as an excuse to crack down on dissent.
Chinese authorities have tightened security across Tibet in the run-up to New Year celebrations next month and vowed to continue a campaign to indoctrinate monks and nuns to be "patriotic" and to pledge allegiance to the Chinese government.
China rejected on Tuesday an invitation for one of its top policymakers to visit Taiwan, saying the island must first abandon its bid to break out of diplomatic isolation.
"It is impossible," a spokesman for the cabinet's Taiwan Affairs Office said when asked if the office's director Wang Zhaoguo would accept the invitation from Taiwanese business leader Kao Ching-yuan.
The spokesman said the time for such a visit was not ripe because Taiwan had yet decided to abandon its "pragmatic foreign policy" of trying to boost its international standing.
"Taiwan...should not seek to enter the United Nations," the spokesman told Reuters by telephone. Taipei lost its seat in the United Nations when Beijing took its place in 1971.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and insists the island is not entitled to official links with other states.
If Wang had accepted and Taiwanese authorities had allowed him to visit, he would have been the most senior Chinese official to set foot on the island since the end of China's civil war in 1949.
Last week, a spokesman for a delegation of Taiwanese business leaders visiting Beijing quoted Wang as saying he would be happy to visit Taiwan if he had an opportunity, but that there was no definite commitment to accept.
The backpedalling by China on Tuesday indicated it was unwilling to make up with Taiwan for now, said a Chinese analyst familiar with Beijing government policy.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei were strained after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark visit to the United States last year in a bid to lift the island out of diplomatic isolation.
China held war games and missile tests off Taiwan in a show of force in the run-up to the island's first presidential elections in March, which Lee won by a landslide.
Taiwan, an island with a population of 21 million, is eager to make up with its giant neighbour, the world's most populous nation with 1.2 billion people.
Last week, Taiwanese business leader Kao urged China to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded ties.
But China was in no hurry to mend political fences, preferring instead to continue heaping pressure on Taiwan, said the analyst, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"China is trying to use Taiwan's industrial and commercial sector to put pressure on the Taiwan authorities," he said.
Last month, China stepped up pressure on Taiwan to lift a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links between the two sides by unilaterally announcing a set of regulations for such links.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links since 1949. Indirect trade and investment has been allowed since the late 1980s, usually through Hong Kong.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport, but Taiwan has been reluctant to remove the curbs, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
Last month, China called for political talks with Taiwan to end the state of hostility to pave the way for reunification.
Both China and Taiwan agree to eventually reunify but on very different terms.
China hit out at Britain on Thursday, saying London's protests against Beijing's proposed amendments to Hong Kong laws after this year's handover of sovereignty were unacceptable, unreasonable and unwise.
"We cannot accept the British protest, it is also totally unreasonable and the so-called protest is unwise," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
"The British side is always forcing its will upon others and this will not work," Shen said, adding that Hong Kong was China's internal affair after the handover and no other country had the right to interfere.
Britain lodged a strong protest on Wednesday against Beijing's plans to dilute laws guaranteeing civil liberties in Hong Kong when it regains control of the colony on July 1 after more than 150 years of British rule.
The Foreign Office said junior minister Jeremy Hanley had expressed Britain's "serious concern" over the proposals at a meeting with Chinese ambassador Jiang Enzhu.
A spokesman said Hanley told the envoy that Hong Kong's bill of rights and related legislation, which China wants to amend, were fully consistent with the Basic Law -- the post-handover constitution for Hong Kong promulgated by Beijing in 1990.
China has accused Britain of violating the Basic Law by unilaterally introducing laws guaranteeing civil liberties in Hong Kong after the handover.
Shen, the Chinese spokesman, defended China's plan to amend or repeal a list of 25 laws and ordinances, saying China was merely reversing unilateral changes made by Britain.
"It is fair and reasonable," Shen said of the proposed amendments.
Beijing is moving to replace Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature and block a lenient law that would exclude China-style crackdowns on dissent.
Shen charged that Patten's expansion of the electoral process in Hong Kong in violation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration on the handover was undemocratic.
"I think that violation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration cannot be considered as something democratic," Shen said. "We are upholding the solemnity of the Sino-British Joint Declaration."
A Chinese envoy to Hong Kong blamed the British protest on Patten, the 28th and last British governor of Hong Kong.
"This was an angry act by Chris Patten who was ashamed that his long-time confrontation with China had been unfruitful," Zhang Junsheng, deputy director of Xinhua News Agency, China's de facto diplomatic mission in Hong Kong, told reporters in the colony.
China's opponents say its planned steps fly in the face of vows that allow Hong Kong to keep its freedoms after it becomes a Special Administrative Region of China.
Patten has called Beijing's moves a "legal nonsense" while pro-democracy groups said it was a blow to democracy and human rights that would dent overseas confidence in Hong Kong.
Donald Tsang, who is responsible for drafting a budget for wealthy Hong Kong that straddles the transition, said China would need to convince investors the changes were necessary.
"If you can't convince the people of Hong Kong, people may take to the streets, some may keep their frustration in their hearts, some in the civil service may quit. Some may emigrate," he told the South China Morning Post newspaper.
The United States expressed strong concern on Tuesday and called on China to reconsider its moves.
A court in southwest China sentenced at least five dissidents to prison terms of up to 10 years for subversion, a human rights watchdog group said on Saturday.
At least eight other dissidents were rounded up in Guiyang, capital of Guizhou province, in the same case, the New York-based Human Rights in China said.
An unknown number of the eight were sentenced, the group said. Details were not available.
The Guiyang Intermediate People's Court sentenced the five dissidents in May, 1996, but Human Rights in China said it was not able to confirm their convictions until recently.
"There were many people involved. The place was remote...It took a lot of time to verify the facts," Xiao Qiang, executive director of Human Rights in China, told Reuters by telephone.
The convictions could not be indepenently confirmed. Court officials and police could not be reached for comment.
Two of the political activists, Lu Yongxiang and Huang Zhongmin, were arrested in Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1995 -- the sixth anniversary of a bloody military crackdown on student-led demonstrations for democracy -- while distributing copies of a daring, open letter to Communist Party leaders, the group said.
Lu, 50, a veteran dissident, and Huang, 35, a businessman, were each sentenced to five years in prison for participating in a counter-revolutionary group, spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement.
Chen Xi, 42, a lecturer-turned-businessman, received the harshest sentence -- 10 years in prison -- for organising and leading a counter-revolutionary group.
The open letter demanded the ruling Communist Party lift a decades-old ban on the establishment of new political parties and newspapers and draft a new constitution guaranteeing independence of the judiciary, democratic elections and freedom of the press.
In the letter, the dissidents threw their weight behind Zhao Ziyang, who was deposed as Communist Party chief in a power struggle that followed the 1989 crackdown.
Zhao is under virtual house arrest, sources close to him have said. He dropped from public view after May 19, 1989, when he visited students occupying Tiananmen Square and, with tears in his eyes, beseeched their leaders to end the protests. The next day hardliners clamped martial law on the Chinese capital.
On June 3 and 4, 1989 troops backed by tanks and firing automatic weapons stormed into the city, retaking the square and crushing the demonstrations with heavy loss of life.
The open letter also demanded the authorities release fellow dissidents, including former student leader Wang Dan, who was sentenced to 11 years in prison last year for conspiring to subvert the government.
The two other dissidents jailed by the Guiyang court were Liao Shuangyuan, 43, a legal adviser, and Zeng Ning, 28, a legal expert, who received four and two years in prison respectively for organising and joining a counter-revolutionary group.
China jailed dozens of dissidents in 1996 as part of a drive for stability that followed an easing of foreign pressure over its human rights record, diplomats and human rights activists say.
Beijing regularly hits out at criticism of its human rights record, regarding it as interference in its internal affairs and saying its priority is to fulfill the rights of its 1.2 billion people to food and clothing.
A Chinese court has agreed to hear a lawsuit by veteran dissident Liu Nianchun accusing the government of illegal incarceration, but finding a defence lawyer has been difficult, Liu's wife said on Thursday.
Although Beijing's Chaoyang District Court has accepted the lawsuit, Liu's family has no money and several lawyers have come under government pressure not to take up the dissident's case, Chu Hailan said in a telephone interview.
In a separate case, Beijing's Dongcheng District Court has agreed to hear Wang Hui's lawsuit accusing police of illegally detaining her for unspecified reasons from May 16 to June 13, Wang told Reuters.
Wang, wife of jailed poet and dissident Zhou Guoqiang, also accused five guards at a detention centre in Changping county near Beijing, where she was held, of beating her up after the guards had been drinking.
She demanded 10,000 yuan ($1,200) in compensation, a public apology from the authorities and punishment of the guards.
No trial dates have been set. The courts declined to comment.
Chinese courts rarely agree to accept lawsuits filed by dissidents or their relatives. But acceptance of the case was only the first hurdle.
"It's very difficult to hire a lawyer. There are all sorts of pressures...and they (lawyers) are worried about their careers," Liu's wife said. "Also, lawyers are expensive. I can't afford them."
"I'm pessimistic...winning is impossible," she said.
International human rights groups have accused China's judiciary of serving as tools to persecute dissidents.
Wang, the poet's wife, was adamant. "I'm not afraid of being jailed again for suing them," she said.
She demanded Chinese authorities allow her husband to visit his 74-year-old mother, who is in hospital with lung cancer.
Wang said she would consider dropping her lawsuit if the authorities allowed her husband, who is suffering from kidney infection, to seek medical treatment at a hospital.
Dissidents Liu, 48, and Zhou, 41, are both serving three year sentences of re-education through labour at a camp in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang, although Zhou has been given an additional year for an unsuccessful escape attempt.
Re-education through labour is an administrative punishment that can be imposed by the authorities without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Chinese authorities appear to have begun favouring the administrative punishment as a way to remove dissidents from circulation without the complicated process of a judicial trial.
The New York-based Human Rights in China, which monitors the human rights situation on the mainland, applauded the court's decision to hear Liu's lawsuit, but warned against perfunctory treatment.
"Liu's case must not be given the perfunctory treatment which has always been given to dissidents' lawsuits against the government in the past," the group said.
Beijing has pledged to open its doors to imports of U.S. textiles under a new deal, but Washington has no illusions it can close its yawning textile trade gap with China, diplomats said Monday.
Chinese and U.S. negotiators signed a new textile agreement in Beijing on Sunday in an 11th-hour deal that ended the threat of a cross-Pacific trade war and ensured U.S. access to China's textile markets.
"It provides us with an opportunity to increase our access to China's markets in high-priority areas," one U.S. diplomat said. He declined to elaborate.
"(But) we are under no illusions that we are going to balance textiles as a single sector of our trade," said a second diplomat, who requested anonymity.
China exported $6.5 billion worth of textiles to the United States in 1995 but imported only $64 million worth. Diplomats attributed the sluggish U.S. textile exports to Beijing's high tariff rates and non-tariff barriers.
"Textiles are never going to be balanced but it's important that there be a market access element there," the second diplomat said.
The agreement gave China a U.S. import quota slightly larger than the previous 1994 textile pact, and China pledged to reduce its tariffs on textile imports.
Both the Chinese and U.S. sides declined to say by how much U.S. textile exports to China would increase and vice versa, or by how much China's tariffs would be cut.
"There are significant gains for U.S. industries," a third diplomat said.
"It was, for the first time, a concessionary admission on (the) part of the Chinese that they too had to do something with regard to supplying market access for U.S. products where we were competitive," he said.
The overall U.S. trade deficit with China -- the United States' largest after its deficit with Japan -- was seen reaching $38 billion in 1996, up from $34 billion in 1995, according to U.S. figures.
The new textile agreement may be good news for U.S. textile manufacturers and exporters, but it could be bad news for China's lumbering state enterprises.
A flood of U.S. textile imports could intensify competition and further cripple many of China's state enterprises, almost half of which are in the red, analysts said.
"U.S. textile imports will intensify competition in the already saturated domestic textile market," a Chinese economist said. "Life will be even more difficult for a group of money-losing textile enterprises," said the economist, who asked not to be identified. "Some enterprises will be forced to bow out of the textile industry -- declare bankruptcy or merge."
State-owned textile factories in Shanghai, China's largest industrial city, registered losses of 350 million yuan ($42.2 million) in the first seven months of 1996, the China Business Times said Monday.
The accord ended the threat of a Sino-U.S. trade war, which had loomed after Washington slapped $19 million in penalties on Chinese imports last September, accusing Beijing of shipping textiles through third countries to evade U.S. restrictions on Chinese imports.
China had threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks. But it delayed the action to allow time for further talks.
Beijing announced after Sunday's deal that it was calling off its retaliatory measures, but Washington's penalties remained in force.
Beijing has pledged to open its doors ajar to imports of U.S. textiles under a new deal, but Washington has no illusions it can close its yawning textile trade gap with China, diplomats said on Monday.
Chinese and U.S. negotiators signed a new textile agreement in Beijing on Sunday in an 11th-hour deal that ended the threat of a cross-Pacific trade war and ensured U.S. access to China's textile markets.
"It (deal) provides us with an opportunity to increase our access to China's markets in high priority areas," one diplomat said. He declined to elaborate.
"(But) we are under no illusions that we are going to balance textiles as a single sector of our trade," said a second diplomat who spoke on condition of anonymity.
China exported $6.5 billion worth of textiles to the United States in 1995 but imported only $64 million. Diplomats attributed the sluggish U.S. textile exports to Beijing's high tariff rates and non-tariff barriers.
"Textiles are never going to be balanced but it's important that there be a market access element there," the second diplomat said.
The agreement granted to China a U.S. import quota slightly larger than the previous 1994 textile pact, and China pledged to reduce its tariffs on textile imports.
Both the Chinese and U.S. sides declined to say by how much U.S. textile exports to China would increase and vice versa, or by how much China's tariffs would be cut.
"There are significant gains for U.S. industries," a third diplomat said.
"It was for the first time a concessionary admission on (the) part of the Chinese that they too had to do something with regard to supplying market access for U.S. products where we were competitive," he said but did not go into details.
The overall U.S. trade deficit with China -- the largest for Washington after its deficit with Japan -- was seen reaching $38 billion in 1996, up from $34 billion in 1995, according to U.S. figures.
The new textile agreement may be good news for U.S. textile manufacturers and exporters, but it could be bad news for China's lumbering state enterprises.
State-owned textile factories in Shanghai, China's largest industrial city, registered losses of 350 million yuan ($42.2 million) in the first seven months of 1996, the China Business Times said on Monday.
The accord ended the threat of a Sino-U.S. trade war, which had loomed after Washington slapped $19 million in penalties on Chinese imports last September, accusing Beijing of shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions. China had threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but delayed the action to allow time for further talks.
Beijing announced after Sunday's deal that it was calling off its retaliatory measures, but Washington's penalties remained in force.
Beijing has pledged to open its doors ajar to imports of U.S. textiles under a new deal, but Washington has no illusions it can close its yawning textile trade gap with China, diplomats said on Monday.
Chinese and U.S. negotiators signed a new textile agreement in Beijing on Sunday in an 11th-hour deal that ended the threat of a cross-Pacific trade war and ensured U.S. access to China's textile markets.
"It (the deal) provides us with an opportunity to increase our access to China's markets in high-priority areas," one diplomat said. He declined to elaborate.
"(But) we are under no illusions that we are going to balance textiles as a single sector of our trade," a second diplomat said on condition of anonymity.
China exported $6.5 billion worth of textiles to the United States in 1995 but imported only $64 million. Diplomats attributed the sluggish U.S. textile exports to Beijing's high tariff rates and non-tariff barriers.
"Textiles are never going to be balanced but it's important that there be a market access element there," the second diplomat said.
The agreement gave China a U.S. import quota slightly larger than the previous 1994 textile pact, and China pledged to reduce its tariffs on textile imports.
Both the Chinese and U.S. sides declined to say by how much U.S. textile exports to China would increase and vice versa, or by how much China's tariffs would be cut.
"There are significant gains for U.S. industries," a third diplomat said.
"It was, for the first time, a concessionary admission on (the) part of the Chinese that they too had to do something with regard to supplying market access for U.S. products where we were competitive," he said but did not go into details.
The overall U.S. trade deficit with China -- the United States' largest after its deficit with Japan -- was seen reaching $38 billion in 1996, up from $34 billion in 1995, according to U.S. figures.
The new textile agreement may be good news for U.S. textile manufacturers and exporters, but it could be bad news for China's lumbering state enterprises.
A flood of U.S. textile imports could intensify competition and further cripple many of China's state enterprises, almost half of which are in the red, analysts said.
"U.S. textile imports will intensify competition in the already saturated domestic textile market," a Chinese economist said.
"Life will be even more difficult for a group of loss-making textile enterprises," said the economist, who asked not to be identified. "Some enterprises will be forced to bow out of the textile industry -- declare bankruptcy or merge."
State-owned textile factories in Shanghai, China's largest industrial city, registered losses of 350 million yuan ($42.2 million) in the first seven months of 1996, the China Business Times said on Monday.
The accord ended the threat of a Sino-U.S. trade war, which had loomed after Washington slapped $19 million in penalties on Chinese imports last September, accusing Beijing of shipping textiles through third countries to evade U.S. restrictions on Chinese imports.
China had threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but delayed the action to allow time for further talks.
Beijing announced after Sunday's deal that it was calling off its retaliatory measures, but Washington's penalties remained in force.
A group of 56 Chinese writers, former officials and academics has petitioned Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin to save cultural relics from the gigantic Three Gorges dam which would flood huge tracts of land.
Ancient tombs and temples were threatened by a dearth of government funds and official under-reporting of those relics that warranted saving, according to the letter, a copy of which was made available to Reuters on Tuesday.
"The hearts of relic protection departments are like burning fire with 10,000 worries and misgivings," it said of the lack of funds.
About 130 historical sites, some of them dating to the Stone Age, could be flooded as soon as next year.
The sites include Qing dynasty (1644-1911) temples, an entire street from the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644) and stone carvings from the Han Dynasty (206 BC-AD 220).
Relocation of many relics had been delayed due to lack of funds, the letter said, adding that the damage would worsen unless government funds for relocation were provided.
The letter dated August 8 was signed by prominent female writer Bing Xin, former ambassador to the United States Chai Zemin and former minister of culture Wang Meng.
Others include Su Bingqi, president of the Archaeological Society, and Yu Weichao, curator of the Museum of Chinese History who is in charge of relocating relics.
Archaeologists had designated 829 buried relics near a reservoir under construction as needing protection. The sites covered a total area of more than 20 million square metres (215 million square ft), but the government has agreed to protect one tenth of the area due to a lack of funds, it said.
Some ancient tombs and relics have already disappeared under the onslaught of bulldozers, the letter said.
Construction of the controversial dam was expected to submerge 632 square km (244 square miles) of land in central China's Hubei province and the southwestern province of Sichuan.
It would force the relocation of 840,000 people from up to 200 villages and towns, according to 1991-92 estimates.
Environmentalists have described the project as a potential ecological disaster, leading to the destruction of a scenic mountain region and the extinction of endangered species.
The Three Gorges dam -- the world's biggest water control project --  was expected to ease seasonal flooding by creating a massive reservoir in Hubei to store waters from rains.
The 6,000-km (3,500-mile) Yangtze river -- China's longest -- and its tributaries have triggered floods throughout much of China's history.
The project, expected to cost $30 billion by its completion in 2009, would also help ease China's crippling shortage of electric power.
The Geneva-based International Federation of Red Cross (IFRC) on Wednesday appealed for food aid for flood-hit North Korea, predicting disaster by the end of the year if relief did not arrive.
"The country is running out of food...they are emptying their warehouses now," Ole Gronning of Denmark, IFRC representative in North Korea, said in an interview in Beijing.
"We will have a human disaster at the end of the year if the food (aid) is not coming," said Gronning, who had been in North Korea since last November. "(By) July...there will be no food in the country."
Devastating floods in 1995 and 1996 left half a million North Koreans homeless out of a total of 23 million, according to relief organisations.
The floods have struck hard at the economy of the hermit communist state, destroying rice fields, roads, factories and livestock and swamping mines.
North Korea was forecast to consume 5.5 million tonnes of grain in 1997, but Pyongyang feared a shortfall of 45 percent, or up to 2.5 million tonnes, Gronning said.
"We already now know that the harvest will not be successful...," he said.
On Monday, North Korea admitted that it had only half the grain needed to feed its people.
Food rations across North Korea had dropped to less than a quarter of the level normally considered essential to maintain a healthy population, Gronning said.
There was no indication yet of famine but grain rations had been cut to 100 grams (3.5 ounces) per person a day -- equivalent to 900 calories -- from 450 grams (15.9 ounces).
"Signs of malnutrition are there," he said.
The IFRC aimed to raise $10 million to feed 139,000 of the worst hit victims for 11 months through October this year, but so far only $1 million had been raised, Gronning said.
About 5.2 million North Koreans were directly affected by the 1995 floods and a further 3.3 million last year.
Two earlier appeals for funds totalling more than $10 million had largely been met.
Photographs taken by Gronning in North Korea showed what he said was arable land under one metre (yard) of sand.
About two percent of North Korea's farmland had been completely destroyed, covered with sand several metres deep, Gronning said. Lack of machinery made reclamation of sand-covered arable land difficult.
North Korea was "very exposed", he said, adding that floods and hailstorms could strike again.
Pyongyang's arch-rival South Korea has been one of the 25 donor countries, pledging 1,000 (corrects from 100,000) tonnes of wheat flour and 15,000 pairs of socks.
"South Korea is coming in very big this year," he said.
Seoul suspended food shipments to North Korea after accusing Pyongyang of landing 26 commandos from a submarine last September. All but two of the group died during a manhunt.
The aid resumed after North Korea apologised and South Korea returned the remains of the infiltrators.
In January, the United States gave permission to Minneapolis-based Cargill Inc, the world's largest private grain trading company, to export 500,000 tonnes of wheat or rice to North Korea in what was expected to be a barter agreement.
China's propaganda machine had a field day on Thursday, lashing out at U.S. newspapers over accusations of torture and rape of Tibetan nuns and suggestions that the United States should get tough with China.
The overseas edition of the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, scoffed at accusations that Chinese authorities tortured, raped and murdered Tibetan nuns, monks and civilians in the restive Himalayan region.
"This series of articles in the Philadelphia Inquirer is weak to the extent that it is laughable," the newspaper said.
The Inquirer published last December a series of articles documenting what it said were stories of rape, torture and murder of Tibetan monks, nuns and ordinary people at the hands of Chinese authorities.
In the articles nearly two dozen cases were documented, including names and dates, from the Himalayan region that has been rocked in recent years by periodic anti-Chinese unrest led by monks and nuns seeking independence and the return of the exiled Dalai Lama.
"This is a critical story that lays bare the efforts by the (Chinese) government to wipe out the culture and religion of the Tibetan people through torture and worse," PRNewswire last December quoted Inquirer Editor Mawell E.P. King as saying.
International human rights groups have made similar accusations, quoting Tibetans who fled China.
China denied the accusations.
"One of the main reasons for the Philadelphia Inquirer and some U.S. media to repeatedly fabricate lies about Tibet is their strong bias, arrogance and conceitedness," the People's Daily said.
"Using the so-called Tibet problem to incite anti-Chinese sentiment is fashionable among the U.S. media," it said.
China's propaganda machine also took on the New York Times, despite a recent rapid warming in ties between Beijing and Washington that had deteriorated in 1995 and up to mid-1996.
"The venom of the New York Times editorial lies in the fact that it...seditiously creates an atmosphere that will poison the relationship between China and the United States at a time when there is a tendency toward improving the bilateral relations," the Xinhua news agency said.
"The Times' editorial writer has one special skill: the ability to confuse black and white and to call a deer a house," Xinhua said.
The New York Times suggested in a January 30 editorial that U.S. President Bill Clinton should get tough with China.
"The demise of Communism may come someday in China, but it would be a mistake to adopt a passive American policy based on that optimistic prospect, as Mr. Clinton seems to be doing," the Times said.
"There is already abundant evidence suggesting that Communism in China is not dying but is instead mutating into a new form that tolerates economic liberties while still suffocating political freedom," the Times said.
Xinhua said comparing in the same breath the collapse of the Berlin Wall with socialist China, which is prospering, was an "incongruous comparison" just as "donkeys' lips don't match horses' jaws".
China has jailed two Mongolians for up to 15 years on charges of separatism and espionage, the London-based human rights group Amnesty International said on Thursday.
Hada, 41, former manager of the Mongolian Academic Bookshop, and Tegexi, 30, who worked in the Inner Mongolian Bureau of Foreign Affairs, were sentenced last December to 15 and 10 years in prison respectively, Amnesty said.
Chinese courts rejected their appeals last month and upheld their original sentences, it said. The pair had been held for a year in solitary confinement without charges or a trial.
"No evidence has been made public to show that Hada and Tegexi were involved in any activity which may be regarded as criminal under international standards," Amnesty said.
It called for their immediate and unconditional release.
The Amnesty report could not be independently confirmed. Officials in China could not be reached for comment on the eve of Lunar New Year holidays.
Amnesty said eight others were detained in December for alleged involvement in "nationalist separatist" activities, but were subsequently released.
Inner Mongolia, a Chinese province, is populated mainly by ethnic Mongolians but there has been little sign of anti-Chinese unrest since the early years after the 1949 communist takeover and the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution when dissent was crushed.
However, in late 1995, authorities in Inner Mongolia arrested 12 people who had demanded more democracy and an autonomous region, according to human rights groups.
Hada and Tegexi were being detained in poor conditions and their health was suffering, Amnesty said. They were living in a cell in Inner Mongolia's Number One Prison with over 30 other people, the report added.
Hada has a recurrence of tuberculosis and his neck was swollen, the group said. It was not known if he had received any medical treatment in prison.
Beijing-based Western analysts say China has tightened its grip on dissent and separatist sentiment ahead of the British colony of Hong Kong's return to Chinese rule on July 1.
"The harsh sentences passed on Hada and Tegexi are indicative of the severe attitude taken during the past year by the Chinese authorities towards suspected nationalists in...Tibet and Xinjiang," Amnesty said.
Inner Mongolia has traditionally been less restive than Tibet and Xinjiang.
Tibet has been rocked in recent years by periodic unrest, which China blames on the Himalayan region's god-king, the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India after an abortive uprising against communist rule in 1959.
Xinjiang borders Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mostly Moslem Central Asian states. The region has been shaken in recent months by several clashes and political killings involving separatists who want to end communist rule in Xinjiang.
"This 'crackdown' has also affected those whose peaceful religious activities are deemed to threaten 'national unity' and 'social stability'," Amnesty said.
Chinese authorities sealed off a town in northwestern Xinjiang and paramilitary police patrolled the streets after at least 10 people were killed in a separatist riot last week, residents said on Tuesday.
"No one can leave, no one can enter," one resident said by telephone from the mainly Moslem town of Yining in the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture near the border with Kazakhstan.
Authorities closed the airport and railway station on Thursday and clamped an after-dark curfew on the town, residents said.
At least 10 people were killed, including one policeman, and some 100 wounded when 1,000 Moslem separatists of the Uighur ethnic minority rampaged through Yining on Wednesday to protest against Beijing rule, Chinese sources and residents have said.
The riot was among the most violent for many years in the restive region of Xinjiang, where Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
Shops and restaurants were closed in Yining and paramilitary police patrolled the streets. Police had arrested many suspects and were hunting other rioters, one Han woman resident said.
Hundreds of Uighurs had been arrested following the riot, said the leader of an exiled nationalist Uighur group in Kazakhstan in an interview in Almaty.
Local officials said the number of arrests was much lower, but refused to give further details.
"They have arrested several counter-revolutionaries and they are catching more," the woman resident said.
"The Uighurs are walking the streets and they look happy because the streets are full of them," she said in a sign of the depth of ethnic divisions. "It's just them in the streets. It's all their people. No one else is on the streets."
However, Han residents said they were not afraid.
"We are not nervous because the armed police and police are here," the woman said.
"If something happens we will...unite," another Han resident said. "There are also patriots among the Uighurs."
Officials tried to play down the riot, describing it as a small incident fuelled by "foreign hostile forces". They refused to say how many people were killed or wounded.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
In Almaty, Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs by the authorities last week.
However, an official of the bureau in charge of directing the clean-up operation after the riot denied that report.
"This is a pure fabrication," he said. "But I cannot tell you the reason."
The rioters attacked Han Chinese on sight, smashed cars and set fire to shops, forcing authorities to mobilise 1,000 police and paramilitary People's Armed Police to quell the violence, witnesses said. Police fired teargas to disperse the crowd.
The demonstrators, shouting anti-Chinese slogans, had marched on a government building, one official said.
The riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by Chinese police, a Chinese source said.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
Chinese authorities have sealed off a town in northwestern Xinjiang and paramilitary police were patrolling the streets after at least 10 people were killed in a separatist Moslem riot last week, residents said on Tuesday.
"No one can leave, no one can enter," one resident said by telephone from Yining in the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture near the border with Kazakhstan.
Authorities closed the airport and railway station on Thursday and clamped an after-dark curfew on the mainly Moslem town, local residents said.
"They (outsiders) can't come to our town. We Yining residents can't go to neighbouring counties," another resident said. "It is to guarantee public safety."
At least 10 people were killed, including one police officer, and some 100 wounded when 1,000 Moslem separatists of the Uighur ethnic minority rampaged through Yining on Wednesday to protest against Beijing rule, Chinese sources and residents have said.
The riot was among the most violent for many years in the restive region of Xinjiang, where Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
Shops and restaurants were closed in the town and paramilitary police patrolled the streets. Police arrested several suspects and were hunting other rioters, one Han woman resident said.
"They have arrested several counter-revolutionaries and they are catching more," she said.
"The Uighurs are walking the streets and they look happy because the streets are full of them," she said in a sign of the depth of ethnic divisions. "It's just them in the streets. It's all their people. No one else is on the streets."
However, Han residents said they were not afraid.
"We are not nervous because the armed police and police are here," the woman said.
"If something happens we will...unite," another Han resident said. "There are also patriots among the Uighurs."
Officials tried to play down the riot, describing it as a small incident fuelled by "foreign hostile forces". They refused to say how many people were killed or wounded.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
Rioters attacked Han on sight, smashed cars and set fire to shops, forcing local authorities to mobilise about 1,000 police and paramilitary People's Armed Police to quell the violence, witnesses said.
Police fired teargas to dispel the crowd.
The demonstrators, shouting anti-Chinese slogans, had marched on a government building, one official said.
The riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by Chinese police, a Chinese source said.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after a series of violent clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
Chinese police have arrested the suspected ringleader of last week's riot in the mainly Moslem northwestern region of Xinjiang that left at least 10 people dead and 144 injured, local officials said on Wednesday.
Authorities had issued emergency circulars calling on local officials to deal a blow to separatism in the frontier region and warning of severe punishment for last week's rioters.
Government units had been ordered to form vigilante squads to guard against possible attacks by separatists in the town of Yining near China's border with Kazakhstan, officials said.
"We are resolved to deal a blow to the handful of ethnic separatist elements," said Zhang Youlian, deputy director of the foreign affairs office for the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture, that administers Yining.
Police had arrested Abudu Heilili, 29, of the Uighur ethnic minority, and were interrogating him following the riot last Wednesday and Thursday, said a local Communist Party official.
The suspect was unemployed and a ringleader of a less violent anti-Chinese demonstration in Yining in August 1995, the official told Reuters by telephone.
Heilili had been released after that protest following "ideological education" -- political indoctrination, he said.
Police had already rounded up 200 to 300 people after last week's riot, in which at least 10 people were killed and 144 injured. Many suspects had been released after questioning, officials said.
The death toll could rise, with up to seven people listed as missing, the party official said. About 90 people were treated for head wounds, and more than 10 were still in hospital.
Of the injured, 132 were civilians while the remaining 12 were members of the paramilitary People's Armed Police, a spokesman for the Xinjiang regional government said.
About 1,000 people, mostly Uighur farmers or unemployed young men, rioted in Yining last week in one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang since the 1949 communist takeover.
Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority in Xinjiang, where ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
"We don't want the Communist Party," the demonstrators had chanted, witnesses said.
Uighur demonstrators had attacked Han Chinese with bricks, clubs and knives, and rampaged through the town, smashing and setting fire to about 20 vehicles and looting shops.
The People's Armed Police only succeeded in dispersing the rioters a day later, firing teargas to break up the crowd.
Authorities had sealed off Yining, an after-dark curfew was in force in some districts and armed police still patrolled the streets. The airport would reopen on Friday, officials said.
A Chinese source said the riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by police.
Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan based in Kazakhstan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs in China last week. Chinese officials dismissed the report.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Chinese police have arrested the suspected ringleader of a riot in the mainly Moslem northwestern region of Xinjiang last week that left at least 10 people dead and 144 injured, local officials said on Wednesday.
Abudu Heilili, 29, of the Uighur ethnic minority, was in police custody and under interrogation following the riot last Wednesday and Thursday in Yining near China's border with Kazakhstan, said a local Communist Party committee official.
The suspect was unemployed, and was a ringleader of a less violent anti-Chinese demonstration in Yining in August 1995, the official told Reuters by telephone.
Heilili had been released after that demonstration following "ideological education" -- a codeword for political indoctrination, he said.
Police rounded up 200 to 300 people after last week's riot, in which at least 10 people were killed and 144 injured. Many suspects had been released after questioning, officials said.
The death toll could rise, with up to seven people listed as missing, the party official said. About 90 people were treated for head wounds, and more than 10 were still in hospital.
Of the injured, 132 were civilians while the remaining 12 were members of the paramilitary People's Armed Police, a spokesman for the Xinjiang regional government said by telephone from Urumqi, Xinjiang's capital.
Authorities had issued circulars calling on local officials to deal a blow to separatism in the frontier region and warning of severe punishment for last week's rioters.
"We are resolved to deal a blow to the handful of ethnic separatist elements," said Zhang Youlian, deputy director of foreign affairs office for the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture, that administers Yining.
About 1,000 people, mostly Uighur farmers or unemployed young men, rioted in Yining last week in one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang since the 1949 communist takeover.
Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority in Xinjiang, where ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
"We don't want the Communist Party," the demonstrators had chanted, witnesses said.
Uighur demonstrators had attacked Han Chinese with bricks, clubs and knives, and rampaged through the town, smashing and setting fire to about 20 vehicles and looting shops.
The People's Armed Police only succeeded in dispersing the rioters a day later, firing teargas to break up the crowd.
Authorities had sealed off Yining, an after-dark curfew was in force in some districts and armed police still patrolled the streets. The airport would reopen on Friday, officials said.
A Chinese source said the riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by police.
Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan based in Kazakhstan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs in China last week. Chinese officials dismissed the report.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
Residents of a town in China's restive northwestern Xinjiang returned to work on Wednesday from the Lunar New Year holiday with officials vowing to deal a blow to separatism after a riot that left 10 people dead.
"The mayor...warned everyone to heighten their vigilance," Zhang Youlian, deputy director of the foreign affairs office of the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture, said by telephone.
"We are resolved to deal a blow to the handful of ethnic separatist elements," Zhang told Reuters.
Police had arrested between 200 and 300 people in the crackdown following the riot, officials said.
About 1,000 people from the Uighur ethnic minority rioted in the town of Yining in Yili prefecture last Wednesday in one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang for several years.
Paramilitary People's Armed Police only succeeded in dispersing the rioters, who smashed and burned cars and looted shops, a day later, a spokesman for the Xinjiang regional government said by telephone from Urumqi, Xinjiang's capital.
The riot left 10 people dead and 144 wounded, he said. All the victims were Han Chinese, another official said.
The death toll could rise, with up to seven people listed as missing, said one official in Yining.
Of the wounded, 132 were civilians while the remaining 12 were members of the paramilitary armed police.
Local residents returned to work on Wednesday after the five-day Lunar New Year holidays, which ended on Tuesday, but an after-dark curfew remained in parts of the town and armed police still patrolled the streets, Zhang said.
"We resumed work today...Basically, it's normal," he said.
Authorities had sealed off the town, but planned to reopen the airport on Friday, Zhang said.
Last week, demonstrators hurling rocks and bricks rampaged through the town, attacking Han Chinese on sight and setting fire to to about 20 vehicles.
Armed police fired teargas to disperse the crowd.
Several leaders of the riot had been arrested, the regional government spokesman said, adding that a manhunt for other rioters was under way.
The leader of an exiled nationalist Uighur group in Kazakhstan said hundreds of Uighurs had been arrested following the riot.
Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the Almaty-based United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs by Chinese authorities last week.
Zhang dismissed the report as a rumour.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
The riot was among the most violent for many years in Xinjiang, where Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
China was caught on Thursday in a no-win situation in a row between its old communist comrade, Pyongyang, and a new commercial ally, Seoul, with a North Korean official holed up in the South Korean embassy in Beijing.
"Whatever way they (the Chinese) play it... it's impossible to keep both Koreas happy," one Western diplomat said.
South Korea said Hwang Jang-yop, a senior aide to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, and an assistant were seeking asylum at Seoul's embassy in Beijing.
North Korea accused the South of kidnapping Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of Pyongyang's ruling Workers' Party, and urged China to sort out the mess -- in North Korea's favour.
Diplomats said they saw little opportunity for Beijing to settle the row in its backyard without disappointing the Stalinist North, one of China's few remaining socialist allies.
"The inevitable outcome is that the guy will end up in Seoul. I can't see any way around it," a second diplomat said.
Diplomats said they expected some tough negotiations on the crisis, with Hwang possibly locked inside the South Korean compound for some time.
South Korea has sent Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha, to Beijing for talks on the defector's fate.
If South Korea can convince China that Hwang sought asylum of his own free will and was not kidnapped, China has little choice but to allow the defector to leave for South Korea, the diplomats said.
Already Beijing was giving a hint of its position.
Chinese police blocked the sedate, tree-lined avenues leading to South Korea's consular office in Beijing, where Hwang arrived by taxi on Wednesday to seek asylum.
The cordon was protection for the compound and its high-profile guest against possible North Korean intrusions rather than to prevent the apparent defector from leaving China, diplomats said.
"The Chinese will play it according to the rules," the second Western diplomat said. "They won't stick their nose into the embassy itself. That's something they'll never do.
"It (the cordon) could be as much for the protection of the South Koreans as anything else because the North Koreans could do anything," he said. "You'd want to make sure there are no untoward incidents."
Hwang, 73, was the highest ranking Pyongyang official to seek asylum in South Korea. He was in charge of the North Korean communist party's foreign policy and a member of its powerful central committee, said Seoul officials, who rank him 24th in the Pyongyang power structure.
But Beijing must placate North Korea, whose friendship China once described as being as close as "lips and teeth".
"They'll have to find some face-saving way to resolve the problem," the second diplomat said.
"They (Chinese) turned a blind eye in the past to defections through China and that may become a lot more difficult from now on," he said.
China has called for calm in the interests of peace and stability in the Korean peninsula while it investigates.
North and South Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
But capitalist South Korea has become an important trading partner and source of investment for China in recent years.
"There's far more in the relationship with South Korea for China than... with North Korea," the first diplomat said.
"China's primary interest in North Korea is that the country doesn't collapse with refugees flooding across the border and possible nuclear problems," he said.
North Korea was suspected in the early 1990s of pursuing a weapons-grade nuclear programme. Under an agreement signed with Washington in 1994 Pyongyang promised to dismantle the programme in return for safer light-water reactors.
China and South Korea negotiated on Friday over the defection of a top North Korean who has taken refuge in Seoul's mission in Beijing while Pyongyang officials said they aimed to persuade the defector to return.
Talks in Singapore between South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha and Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen failed to break a deadlock over the defector, Hwang Jang-yop, 73, the most senior Pyongyang official to flee the North.
In Beijing, however, a South Korean embassy official said negotiations had begun over Hwang, who spent a second night in the embassy compound with an aide as Seoul and Pyongyang both made hectic efforts to claim him.
China has been dragged unwillingly into the row between an old communist comrade and a new business friend.
Diplomats have said China may find itself with little option but to give in to the wishes of the defector, thus angering one of its last remaining socialist allies.
Beijing tried to play for time.
"This incident happened all of a sudden, so we need more time to investigate," China's Qian told reporters after a 50-minute meeting with Seoul's Yoo in Singapore.
He urged both Koreas "to treat this matter with a cool and calm manner, to keep peace and stability".
Yoo said the two sides would meet again, but did not say where or when. He said Friday's talks were "good".
In the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, dozens of Chinese police cordoned Seoul's consular section off for a second day. Hwang arrived at its door on Wednesday to seek asylum.
"They (North Koreans) are harassing us and we are a little nervous about that," said South Korean embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik, adding that Seoul had asked Beijing to maintain tight security around the compound.
Hwang, who could face summary execution or a lifetime in the gulag if he goes back to the North, was in good health and sleeping well, Chang said. He was spending the day reading.
A North Korean official standing outside the police cordon said Pyongyang had no plans to storm the compound to recover a countryman Pyongyang says was kidnapped.
"We are waiting here for him to come out and then ask him to come back," said the official who declined to identify himself.
A group of about 10 North Koreans, badges of the late North Korean leader Kim Il-sung pinned to their lapels, returned to wait in freezing temperatures outside the compound on Friday after police asked them to leave overnight.
"If China allows him to go to South Korea then we will be disappointed," said another North Korean. "It will be regrettable."
Some commentators have suggested Pyongyang might react violently to the defection of a man ranked 24 in its hierarchy, who is a senior aide to reclusive leader Kim Jong-il and North Korea's top communist party theoretician.
Pyongyang has charged that Hwang must have been kidnapped, and has called on Beijing to sort out the mess.
Seoul has dismissed as "preposterous" Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, was abducted.
It was not clear whether Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to South Korea's Foreign Minister, was meeting Chinese officials.
Kim failed to hold talks with Chinese officials when he arrived on Thursday as Beijing, apparently angered by Seoul's decision to export its latest row with Pyongyang into China, avoided a meeting, South Korean sources said.
Officials at the North Korean embassy refused to comment or confirm reports from Seoul that Pyongyang had sent a delegation to China to discuss Hwang's defection.
Chinese police have moved North Korean diplomats away from the area around the South Korean mission in Beijing where a top-level Pyongyang official has taken refuge, witnesses said on Friday.
However, there was no sign of movement in a diplomatic impasse over the fate of Hwang Jang-yop, 73, a pillar of North Korea's Stalinist establishment, and his assistant who have sought asylum in the South.
China, finding itself in a diplomatic quandary involving its old communist comrade and a new commercial friend, has avoided direct comment and chosen instead to appeal for calm.
In Singapore, South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha and Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen met to discuss a South Korean appeal for safe passage from Beijing to Seoul for the defector, a senior aide to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il.
Qian said after the talks that Beijing needed more time.
"This incident happened all of a sudden, so we need more time to investigate," he told reporters.
In the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, dozens of Chinese police cordoned Seoul's consular section off for a second day. Hwang, the most senior official to defect from North Korea, arrived on Wednesday to seek asylum.
"They are harassing us and we are a little nervous about that," said South Korean embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik, adding that Seoul had asked Beijing to maintain tight security around the compound.
Chinese police moved away several North Koreans watching the compound from cars parked in side streets overnight, witnesses said.
"I still don't believe it," said one North Korean who drove up to the cordon on Friday. "Judging from this situation and his position it is not possible for him to defect.
"If China allows him to go to South Korea then we will be disappointed," said the North Korean, who declined to identify himself. "It will be regrettable."
Pyongyang has charged that Hwang, 73, one of the chief architects of North Korean communism, must have been kidnapped, and has called on Beijing to sort out the mess.
Seoul has dismissed Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, was kidnapped, saying he arrived at the compound in a taxi on Wednesday.
China's Foreign Ministry said it had nothing to say on Friday on the diplomatic tussle in its backyard.
It was not clear whether Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha, would meet Chinese officials on Friday.
Kim failed to hold talks with Chinese officials when he arrived from Seoul on Thursday as Beijing, apparently angered by Seoul's decision to export its latest row with Pyongyang into China, avoided a meeting, South Korean sources said.
However, he met the defector inside the compound.
Officials at the North Korean embassy refused to comment or confirm reports from Seoul that Pyongyang had sent a delegation led by an official at the level of vice-minister and including officials from the ruling Workers Party and the Foreign Ministry to discuss Hwang's defection.
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
Most Chinese have been slow to forgive and forget Japanese atrocities in World War Two and fear a possible resurgence of militarism in the land of the rising sun, a survey published in Beijing on Saturday showed.
The survey, conducted by the official China Youth Daily last December, showed that 99.4 percent of 15,000 people interviewed nationwide thought young Chinese "should remember" Japan's 1931-45 occupation of China.
More than 97 percent of the respondents were aged below 40, too young to have been victims of Japan's war atrocities. By Beijing's count, 35 million Chinese were killed or wounded by invading Japanese troops.
Asked what first came to their minds when Japan was mentioned, 81.3 percent of respondents said the Rape of Nanjing.
Japanese troops marched into Nanjing, China's pre-communist capital and known then as Nanking, in 1937 and engaged in an orgy of rape and massacre. Up to 250,000 Chinese were believed to have been killed.
More than 97 percent of respondents said they could not tolerate repeated attempts by Japanese officials to whitewash their wartime atrocities, including the Rape of Nanjing.
The China Youth Daily survey showed that 94.9 percent of the respondents were opposed to Japan becoming a United Nations Security Council member.
It also showed that 85.1 percent of respondents believed Japan wanted to become a military superpower and 70.7 percent saw Japan as a new threat to peace in Asia.
China itself ruffled feathers in the region last March when it intimidated rival Taiwan by conducting missile tests and war games close to the island in the run-up to Taiwan's historic presidential elections.
The sheer size of the People's Liberation Army -- the world's biggest at three million -- has caused uneasiness among China's neighbours.
China has been mired in a dispute with Japan over a group of islands in the East China Sea and another dispute with Asian neighbours over the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea.
The survey showed that 53.8 percent of respondents thought that Japanese despised Chinese, while 50.8 percent said Japanese discriminated against Chinese.
Many Chinese themselves harbour deep suspicions and are hostile toward foreigners.
More than 56 percent of the respondents said the Japanese were "cruel", 45.2 percent said "arrogant" and 45.3 percent described them as "war freaks" by nature.
But 52.7 percent of the respondents said they owned Japanese-made electrical appliances.
Many respondents were suspicious of Japanese motives for investing in China. More than half said Japanese investment aimed to control China, while 45.3 percent said Japan dumped outdated equipment in China.
On Friday, the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, accused the United States and Japan of covering up the U.S. military's firing of uranium-tipped bullets near Okinawa during drills in December 1995 and January 1996.
The United States apologised this month.
The People's Daily said Washington's argument that the bullets were mislabelled was unconvincing and questioned why the incident was kept a secret for more than a year.
For Moslems of the Uighur ethnic minority in northwest China, wearing neckties bearing a crescent and a star -- the national emblem of East Turkestan -- could land them in jail. But many young men are proudly defiant.
For Tibetan monks, nuns and civilians, displaying pictures of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, could mean imprisonment. But almost every Tibetan family in the deeply religious Himalayan region of China has one.
Uighurs, Tibetans and other ethnic minority groups tried to resist Chinese rule for decades, but uprisings were crushed and dissent silenced under the late chairman Mao Zedong's iron-fisted rule.
With Beijing loosening its grip slightly in recent years, more Uighurs and Tibetans have dared to speak their minds, and many clamour for independence in defiance of Beijing's attempts to dilute their culture.
An anti-Chinese riot in the restive northwestern region of Xinjiang -- a region that Moslem separatists call East Turkestan -- this month left nine people dead and 198 wounded, officials said. Police arrested up to 300 people after the riot.
"Minority ethnic groups are like wild horses that are difficult to tame," a government official in Beijing said.
"They could gallop away at any time...regardless of how well fed they are," said the official, speaking anonymously. "Like a centrifugal force, their tendency is to move away.
"Ethnic minorities are an old problem, a big problem and a difficult problem to solve," the official added.
This month's Moslem riot was one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang -- which means New Frontier in Chinese -- since the communist takeover in 1949.
Xinjiang, bordering Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mostly Moslem Central Asian states, was shaken last year by bombings and assassination attempts.
Tibet has been rocked periodically by riots led by Buddhist monks and nuns loyal to the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against the Chinese.
China accuses the Dalai Lama, who won the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland, of fomenting unrest in Tibet.
Extremities committed during the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution in Xinjiang and Tibet have contributed to the resolve of ethnic minorities to try to bolt, analysts said.
Han Chinese, who account for more than 90 percent of China's population of 1.2 billion, have been accused of trying to dilute the cultures of Uighurs and Tibetans.
Uighurs were banned from learning their written language in the Cultural Revolution. "It's like hacking them with a knife. They'll never forget the wound," the government official said.
Han Chinese have had more success assimilating other ethnic minorities. The proud Manchus ruled China from 1644 to 1911, but few Manchus can read or write their own language.
A natural divide in looks, lifestyle, language was to blame for much ethnic unrest in more far-flung regions, analysts said.
Uighurs, like their Central Asian cousins, speak Turkic, are Moslems and abstain from pork, a main staple for Han Chinese.
"There's a big difference in the lifestyle, food, language, customs, costume and culture of Han Chinese and Uighurs. These are natural barriers," the official said.
China blames "hostile foreign forces" for much of the ethnic unrest. Kazakhstan is home to many exiled Uighur separatists.
China also has repeatedly accused Western countries of supporting Tibet's Dalai Lama.
"But why are there no disturbances in Inner Mongolia?" one analyst asked in reference to China's northern region, populated mainly by ethnic Mongolians. "That is because Mongolia did not extend its arm into China."
Selling motorcycles used to be a joy ride for the giant, military-founded China Jialing Industrial Co Ltd, but then it ran into real market competition and growth slowed down sharply.
"Up until 1995, we sold as much as we produced," said Tian Min, deputy director of financial affairs at the Shanghai-listed firm, in which the Chinese government has a 75 percent stake.
But Jialing, China's biggest motorcycle manufacturer and a former munitions manufacturer that began making civilian products in 1979, saw rival manufacturers mushroom across China in 1994 and 1995 to cash in on its market.
Cutthroat competition slashed prices and profits and swelled stockpiles last year.
"In 1996, we could not sell what we produced," Tian said in an interview at Jialing's headquarters in China's wartime capital of Chongqing in southwestern Sichuan province.
Jialing's sales plunged to 3.5 billion yuan ($421.7 million) in 1996 from 4.6 billion yuan in 1995. After-tax profits tumbled to 270 million yuan in 1996 from 460 million yuan in 1995.
"Sales in 1994 and 1995 were good and many seeing this jumped aboard," Tian said.
China has about 300 motorcycle plants with total annual production capacity of 20 million units, but only 10 make more than 100,000 a year.
China is the world's largest motorcycle maker, churning out 7.83 million units in 1995, but selling only 6.1 million.
Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji has called for moves to curb blind investment in industries that appear profitable.
Blind investment is being repeated in many sectors, such as colour televisions, washing machines and refrigerators. Production has outstripped demand, leading to overheated competition, price wars and mounting losses among state firms.
Adding to the problems of motorcycle manufacturers, some regional governments, alarmed at traffic congestion and air pollution, have discouraged motorcycle purchases by curbing the issue of licence plates.
TIGHT MONETARY POLICY TO BLAME
Tian also blamed the company's woes on the government's tight monetary policy to rein in galloping inflation.
"The motorcycle market shrank...because people have less money...and less buying power," he said.
Tight monetary policy has also resulted in triangular debt, or debt owed among state-owned firms, and cash flow problems.
"Debts owed to each other are very serious...We can't get our money back for motorcycles sold," Tian said.
Jialing's collectibles soared to 700 million yuan in 1996.
The company has formed debt collection squads and aims to reduce collectibles to 300 million yuan by end-1997. Collectibles were virtually non-existent in 1994.
STRUGGLING TO REMAIN NUMBER ONE
The climb to the top is hard. Staying on top is even harder.
A price war has forced Jialing to slash prices by an average of 13 percent in 1997, Tian said. The price cut was expected to reduce sales by 400 million yuan a year.
Sales staff would receive commissions linked to performance instead of a fixed salary to try to increase sales, he said.
Jialing will curb waste and cut stockpiles, now 80,000-90,000. It is inviting tenders to force competition among parts suppliers and expects to save 300 million yuan in 1997.
Its motorcycle engines are produced at a joint venture plant with Japan's Honda Motor Co Ltd.
Sales were forecast to hit 4.2 billion yuan in 1997, while profits would be "no lower" than in 1996, Tian said.
Jialing would produce 1.35 million motorcycles in 1997 from 1.13 million in 1996. It has capacity for 1.7 million.
Its 1995 output of 1.1085 million motorcycles accounted for 14 percent of the national total of 7.83 million. Jialing's output was forecast to hit two million in the year 2000.
AMBITIONS RISE BEYOND MOTORCYCLES
Jialing has ambitions to do more than produce motorcycles.
It has applied to issue H shares in Hong Kong to raise funds to expand into car production, financing and pharmaceuticals.
The company wants to set up a non-bank financial institution to finance motorcycle sales, Tian said.
To meet the challenges of China's fledgling market economy, Jialing, like many state enterprises, must tackle overstaffing and the burden of cradle-to-grave welfare for its employees.
Jialing plans to lay off about one percent of its 12,500 employees in 1997, with the accumulated figure hitting 3,000 in the year 2000, Tian said.
"We're not like capitalist countries...we can't just abandon them," Tian said. "We have to help them to find new jobs...or it'll bring problems to our social order and stability."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
North Korea said on Monday it would fire a top official marooned in South Koreas embassy in China if he sought asylum and Seoul went on alert for possible attack but said it wanted talks on the Cold War crisis.
Pyongyangs Foreign Ministry, commenting on the highest level defection yet from the Stalinist nation, saying that if leading ideologue Hwang Jang-yop had been kidnapped, then North Korea would take "decisive countermeasures".
"Our stand is simple and clear. If he was kidnapped, we cannot tolerate it and we will take decisive countermeasures," the KCNA news agency, monitored in Tokyo, quoted the Foreign Ministry as saying.
"If he sought asylum, it means that he is a renegade and he is dismissed," it said, adding that it had asked Beijing to investigate what it called the disappearance of Hwang, who took refuge in Seouls mission in Beijing six days ago.
North Koreas ambassador was believed to have met officials at Chinas Foreign Ministry on Monday.
Hwangs defection has embarrassed his hermit homeland, delighted Seoul and mired Beijing in a quandary over how to usher him out of China without offending an old communist comrade or a new capitalist friend.
But Hwang turned 74 on Monday with no sign of progress to celebrate in his appeal for asylum in the South, and still stranded in Seouls heavily guarded consulate in Beijing.
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright voiced U.S. concern over events on the Korean peninsula, saying they underlined the need for dialogue between rival North and South.
South Korea prepared for possible attacks by Pyongyang as the Cold War crisis escalated, but said confrontation over the defector would not scuttle its efforts for detente.
Another prominent defector, Li Il-nam, a nephew of North Korean leader Kim Jong-ils ex-wife, remained in a coma after being shot and critically wounded at the weekend by suspected North Korean agents near Seoul.
Security around South Koreas ports, airports and other public places had been beefed up and 10,000 police and soldiers searched for the two suspected agents who shot Li.
Seoul Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha said problems stemming from Hwangs defection were just the start of headaches for Seoul because of a crisis in the North.
"I believe the North Korean regimes crisis will deepen as time passes because theres no likelihood of improvement in its economic hardship and food shortages, and signs of laxity in its social order," Yoo told a meeting of South Korean diplomats.
South Koreas security-related ministers on Sunday agreed that a desperate Pyongyang resort to guerrilla attacks after Hwang, a top adviser the Norths Kim Jong-il, sought asylum.
Dour warnings from North Korean officials in Beijing of the consequences of any attempt to move Hwang to the South gave a hint of Pyongyangs willingness to retaliate.
"If they make him go to Seoul, I think there will be war," said one North Korean official who declined to be identified.
South Korean diplomats and Chinese police guarding the mission brought in extra blankets and mattresses in a sign they expected a lengthy stand-off over Hwang.
However, dozens of North Korean officials disappeared on Monday afternoon from outside the building where they have kept a round-the-clock vigil since Hwang disappeared inside.
China, an unwilling third party in the feuding between the two hostile ends of the Korean peninsula, has appealed to both sides to act calmly to resolve the affair.
Analysts say the North has suffered huge loss of face over the defection of Hwang, who was ranked high in the hierarchy of his Stalinist homeland and was the architect of its governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance.
Beijing's new mayor on Monday vowed the battle against corruption in the Chinese capital would go on but sought to put behind him a graft scandal that led to the downfall of the city's Communist Party boss.
Acting Mayor Jia Qinglin told the Beijing People's Congress, or city council, that a government crackdown on corruption had curbed wining and dining at public expense, the use of luxury cars by low-ranking officials and civil servants living in excessively large housing.
"The struggle against corruption has been crowned with new results," the mayor said. "We must unceasingly score new victories in the struggle against corruption."
Chinese Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has identified corruption as a virus that could topple the ruling party and some of China's most serious cases under communist rule have emerged in Beijing.
Officials would be required to declare their incomes and gifts received and the government would speed up supervision of the approval of major infrastructure projects, the appointment of key officials and the appropriation of funds, Jia said.
In his 100-minute speech to the opening session in Beijing's Great Hall of the People, Jia made no mention of Chen Xitong, who was ousted as Beijing's Communist Party secretary in April, 1995.
The mayor wanted to bury the scandal, analysts said.
"Jia Qinglin is an outsider...and doesn't know how deep Beijing's political waters are," one analyst said.
Jia was party secretary of the southeastern province of Fujian before being appointed as Beijing mayor last October.
The Beijing People's Congress was expected to formally elect Jia as mayor during its five-day session.
"If he can avoid the controversy, he will run away from it as far as possible," said the analyst, who asked not to be identified.
Other Beijing officials, including former mayor Li Qiyan, have previously mentioned Chen in their speeches, urging party cadres to draw a lesson from the scandal. Li has been removed and appointed a vice-minister of labour.
One academic said: "Jia Qinglin is a newcomer. Issues like these are better left unsaid. It's no good if he talks too tough. It's also no good if it's not tough enough."
Chen, 66, has been out of the public eye since stepping down as Beijing party boss after his protege, Vice-Mayor Wang Baosen, committed suicide after coming under investigation for corruption in April 1995.
Chen was sacked from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the puritan communists swept to power in 1949.
Last December, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa, said Chen could be punished for dereliction of duty but not for any more serious offence.
Chen had accepted many expensive gifts, but more than a year of investigation into the man who presided over China's capital for most of the 1980s had uncovered no evidence of wrongdoing in exchange, Zhang said.
Chen was being held outside Beijing, pending completion of the investigation, he said.
One of Chen's sons, Chen Xiaotong, former general manager of a Sino-Japanese joint venture hotel in Beijing, has been detained. His wife was free, but his mistress was on the run, Zhang said.
China is considering restrictions on foreign investment in textiles, garments and sectors where domestic production capacity is already excessive, a senior official of the State Statistical Bureau said on Tuesday.
"The production capacity of some of our traditional industries, such as textiles and garments, is pitifully excessive," Li Qiming, director of the bureau's department of industry and transportation statistics, told Reuters.
"We are currently considering...whether to restrict foreign businessmen from entering sectors in which domestic production capacity is already abundant," Li said. He did not elaborate.
The losses of state enterprises in these industries exceed the national average, Li said but gave no specific figures.
China has said it would curb textile output and unnecessary expansion in the industry in 1997 to reduce losses in the state sector. It has set a target of phasing out obsolete textile equipment, including 10 million cotton spindles.
"There were 429 state textile enterprises that posted losses of more than five million yuan ($602,000) each in 1995. Their combined losses reached 5.21 billion yuan."
"Indigenous enterprises are being squeezed...in some traditional industries," Li told a news conference.
"We may have to consider protection," he said.
The bureau spent one year and mobilised five million pollsters to conduct a survey of industries that showed that foreign investment was concentrated mainly in electronics, telecommunications, textile, garment and food processing, officials said.
China's 10 eastern coastal provinces and provincial-level cities have attracted 87 percent of total foreign investment, while five provinces in northwest China took in less than one percent of foreign investment, Li said.
The survey showed 59,311 wholly foreign-owned and Sino-foreign joint ventures had set up in China by the end of 1995, up 29,343, or 97.9 percent compared with end-1994.
Their combined output value was 1.2 trillion yuan ($144.6 billion) at end-1995, the survey showed. They made profits totalling 79.2 billion and paid 39.8 billion yuan in taxes.
The number of foreign-funded enterprises accounted for 10 percent of the total number of enterprises in China, but the output of foreign firms accounted for 20 percent of the total.
Hong Kong and Taiwan businessmen were the biggest investors, accounting for 32.6 percent of the total. It was inevitable that the government would impose restrictions on foreign investment in industries to protect the state sector, analysts said.
About 38 percent of state enterprises registered losses in 1996 compared with the previous year, Li said.
Losses posted by state firms soared 37.53 percent in 1996, he said.
Pre-tax profits of state enterprises slipped 4.83 percent in 1996 while after-tax profits plunged 42.5 percent.
Excessive stockpiles accounted for 20 percent of funds tied up by finished products.
Debts owed among enterprises worsened, with collectibles of state enterprises increasing by 11.8 percent in 1996.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
China's leadership has dissolved the once-powerful personal office of 92-year-old patriarch Deng Xiaoping in what could be a sign his health is increasingly fragile, a Chinese source and diplomats said on Wednesday.
Deng's health has stirred intense speculation this week, rocking stock markets in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan on Tuesday and prompting an attempt by Beijing to calm fears.
Japanese media reported that Deng had been admitted to hospital in critical condition, while a Hong Kong newspaper said he was recuperating at home from a brain haemorrhage but was not near death.
China's official media on Wednesday made no mention of Deng's health.
The Deng office of advisers and secretaries -- or "Deng ban" as it is known in Chinese -- was dissolved shortly before the Lunar New Year, which fell on February 7, a Chinese source with close ties to the Communist Party said.
"If true, it is a signal Deng's health had deteriorated... Deng can no longer sustain a very active role in the political sphere," said a Western diplomat who had heard about the disbanding of the office.
Chinese sources told Reuters on Monday that Communist Party chief and state President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng cut short out-of-town trips last weekend to return to Beijing to visit the ailing patriarch.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival, when he appeared frail and faltering.
The dissolution of the Deng office also signalled China's succession problem was virtually complete and that Jiang had further consolidated power.
"Jiang Zemin is eager to tell the world that he is now in charge... and he no longer needs to take directives from Deng's office," the Chinese source said.
The office used to issue directives to the current leadership, including Jiang, but was considered to have outlived its usefulness, the source said.
It had been headed by Deng's top aide, General Wang Ruilin, a member of the party's powerful Central Military Commission.
"Deng Xiaoping has been retired for many years... Deng's office has no direct function," the source said.
Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, retired from his last official position in 1990 and his only post now is honorary chairman of China's Bridge Association, a title that reflects his lifelong passion for the game.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically and often have a direct impact on China-related bourses, where Deng's demise is seen by some as a potentially destabilising factor.
Apparently trying to calm China's markets, newspapers splashed a report that economic tsar Zhu Rongji held a seminar on Deng's economic theories and reported Deng had sent his condolences for the funeral of a late defence minister.
The Japanese daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun, quoting diplomatic sources in Beijing with close ties to senior military officials, said Deng was critically ill after a brain haemorrhage.
The Chinese leadership had told senior party and government officials not to leave the country unless obliged to do so for pressing diplomatic reasons, the newspaper said.
Japan's Kyodo news agency said Deng suffered a brain haemorrhage last Friday.
Hong Kong's Ming Pao newspaper said Deng was recuperating at home and "was not about to die soon".
On Tuesday, China played down fears that Deng's health was deteriorating, saying there had been "no big change". It declined to say if there had been a small change or what could count as a major change.
Will the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping plunge the world's most populous country into chaos and division, or will heir apparent Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin take over the reins?
Diplomats and analysts said on Thursday they expected calm before any storm.
Will Deng's anointed successor, who also holds the jobs of state President and head of the armed forces, escape the fate of Chairman Mao Zedong's chosen heir -- a man who survived less than two years when he locked horns with Deng over power?
Will Jiang reverse his mentor's economic reforms and return to Mao Zedong's orthodox communism? Will a power struggle brew behind the scenes among those eager to succeed Deng as China's de facto emperor?
The world will be watching to see which way China's political winds blow -- and how the leadership copes with a plethora of problems from unemployment, a widening gap between rich and poor, corruption and a one-party system.
"I don't think there will be an immediate power struggle," one Western diplomat said on Thursday. "The immediate concern will be to present a face of calm, stability and normality."
Deng died late on Wednesday of respiratory failure -- a complication from Parkinson's disease and a lung infection. He ws 93 by Chinese reckoning, which adds a year to one's age.
His pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
"There hasn't been such a death in 20 years, of such a prominent figure," another diplomat said.
China would be obsessed with stability and security, but the country could ground to a halt for some time while the nation mourns and leaders jockey for position, analysts said.
"There's going to be a lot more emphasis on stability, more focus on internal security so it's going to be... a cautious leadership," Hong Kong-based Sinologist Tai Ming Cheung said.
"There may be a certain amount of policy paralysis, which has been there already, but beyond that I don't see any great changes," Cheung said. "There is going to be a lull."
One Chinese analyst, who asked not to be identified, said stability would be a facade.
"It'll be like a duck swimming -- on the surface it'll be calm but underneath it'll be turbulent," said the analyst, quoting a Chinese proverb.
Jiang, 70, appears to have consolidated his power base.
But his political rivals, including Qiao Shi, 72, chairman of the National People's Congress, or parliament, were expected to jostle for power in the run-up to a crucial party congress later this year, analysts said.
"I expect an increase in political jockeying," Cheung said.
"I think that Jiang is making all the running and he is in a fairly strong position, so he is the one -- barring any mistakes -- to take full advantage, but then the other people will be pushing just as hard," Cheung said.
Jiang's predecessor, Zhao Ziyang, 77, who was sacked in 1989 as general secretary of the party for showing sympathy to students demonstrating for democracy, is waiting in the wings to stage a political comeback.
Zhao has not been seen in public for more than six years and is believed to be living under house arrest in Beijing.
Most analysts say Jiang is in control, but some write him off as a transitional leader.
"He (Jiang) has been consolidating his power considerably over the last year," the first diplomat said. "He is now less dependent on Deng Xiaoping."
