Beijing's top negotiator with rival Taipei sought on Tuesday to allay Taiwan's fears that China would swallow up the island if Taipei lifts a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links between the two.
"We feel this kind of strange logic is very ridiculous," Tang Shubei, vice-chairman of the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits, said of Taiwan's concerns.
"We advocate that after reunification, 'you don't eat me up and I don't eat you up'," he told reporters in his Beijing office.
Taiwan has banned direct air and shipping links with China since Chiang Kai-shek's nationalist troops lost the civil war to Mao Zedong's communist army in 1949 and fled into exile in Taiwan. Taiwan allows indirect links through Hong Kong or third countries.
Taiwanese businessmen have poured more than $20 billion into China. Many of them have been clamouring for direct transport links, but Taiwan authorities are reluctant to lift the ban lest the island become an economic hostage to China.
Tang said scrapping the ban would help both sides and said Taiwan's losses would be greater than China's in the long run if it resisted direct links.
China unilaterally introduced a series of regulations in August to pave the way for direct shipping links with Taiwan. China first called on Taiwan to lift the ban 17 years ago.
The ban would in effect be scrapped in mid-1997 in any case when the British colony of Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule, Tang said, adding that Taiwanese aircraft and ships could continue to land and dock in Hong Kong.
He said the reunification of China and Taiwan would become a more glaring issue after the nearby Portuguese enclave of Macau reverts to Chinese rule in 1999.
"The Taiwan problem will stand out in front of us after Hong Kong's return in 1997 and Macau's return in 1999," Tang said.
Tang said time and patience were needed for China and Taiwan to reunify, but declined to spell out a timetable.
"Time is needed to resolve the Taiwan problem. We have adequate patience," he said, but urged Taiwan not to seek to declare independence. Beijing has threatened to invade if Taiwan declared independence.
He renewed an offer to hold political talks to end almost five decades of animosity. "Political differences must be resolved (through) political talks," Tang said.
But Tang said Taiwan must first abandon its attempt to break out of diplomatic isolation.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into isolation.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei plunged after the landmark, private visit by Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to the United States in June 1995 that China saw as a move to raise the island's international profile.
China's military conducted missile tests and war games off Taiwan before the island's first direct presidential elections last March, which Lee won by a landslide.
Last week, China accused Taiwan of standing in the way of reunification by creating obstacles to economic and trade cooperation, saying the island was "squashing its own feet with a rock" by refusing to end the ban.
China said on Wednesday Japan was heading for confrontation with an election platform reiterating Tokyo's claim to disputed islands in the East China Sea but said it was not too late for Japan to stop its reckless gamble.
"Japan is turning a deaf ear to warnings and protests from China...and has embarked on the road to confrontation," the official China Daily said, commenting on the election platform of Japan's biggest political party, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
"It is still not too late for Japan to stop this reckless gamble," the newspaper said in a commentary. "It is high time for Japan to take measures to stop the game for the sake of the world and its own future."
The LDP announced last week an election platform that reiterates Tokyo's claim to the East China Sea islands, which Tokyo calls the Senkakus and which Beijing and Taipei call the Diaoyus.
"Japan has not learnt the lesson of its militarist expansion and...it is going into another dangerous game," the newspaper said.
On Monday, about 300 Taiwanese and Hong Kong protesters aboard a 50-boat flotilla pierced a Japanese maritime cordon around the islands and briefly raised the flags of Beijing and Taipei on the rocky outcrops in a challenge to Tokyo's claim of sovereignty.
Japan has sought to calm passions in the dispute and asked China and Japan to prevent a recurrence of Monday's landings. Tokyo has said it would not recognise a lighthouse built on one of the islands by Japanese rightwingers this year.
Japanese rightwingers sailed to the islands in July and repaired the lighthouse, rekindling the dispute.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang on Tuesday accused Japan of taking an irresponsibile approach by encouraging landings on the islands by the rightwing groups.
Shen warned that the will of the Chinese people "cannot be bullied" and that sovereignty ranked above everything else.
The row was aggravated last week when a Hong Kong activist drowned after diving into stormy seas near the islands as part of a protest against Tokyo's sovereignty claim.
Tokyo's claim dates back to 1895, when it defeated imperial China and seized the uninhabited islands. Japan says the issue is not open for discussion.
China has claimed sovereignty over the islands for centuries.
Taiwan has no diplomatic ties with Japan, which only recognises Beijing's Communist government.
The China Daily commentary also slammed the LDP's election platform for containing an endorsement of visits by cabinet ministers to a Tokyo shrine to Japan's war dead.
"Japanese politicians have waged a war to reverse the verdict on Japan's war shame concluded by the world half a century ago," the commentary said.
Japanese prime minister and LDP leader Ryutaro Hashimoto in July broke a decade-long taboo on prime ministerial visits to Tokyo's Yasukuni Shrine, saying it was time for Japan to stop apologising for honouring its fallen soldiers.
"Such dishonest activities, which reinvigorate militarism, have naturally caused indignation in the war-victimised countries," the newspaper commentary said in reference to visits to the shrine by Japanese leaders.
Last week, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang expressed strong indignation over the LDP's election platform.
China's propaganda tsars have axed all the novels and two films of controversial writer Wang Shuo, among the earliest victims of a crusade to resurrect communist puritanism.
The state-owned Hua Yi publishing house decided recently to stop publishing a four-volume collection of Wang's 30-odd novels after coming under fire from the Propaganda Department of the ruling Communist Party, the author said on Friday.
"Someone reported me to the Propaganda Department. They said my works were reactionary...and ridiculed politics," Wang told Reuters by telephone.
"They said the taste and the language were vulgar...I do not deny this," said Wang, the author of colloquial novels that depict the underbelly of society in Chinese cities and are peppered with strong language and sex.
Propaganda tsars forced Hua Yi to write a self-criticism for publishing such politically incorrect books, Wang said.
"Hua Yi dared not continue publishing my books...No other publication house will dare to publish them," he said.
"The decision is very regrettable...I hope this is temporary...Not all my books have problems. I hope they will allow publication of some of them."
The publishing house and the Propaganda Department could not be reached for comment.
Hua Yi has published about 200,000 copies of the "Collected Works of Wang Shuo" since 1992. Wang earns more than 100,000 yuan ($12,000) a year from reprints of his works, about 20 times the average urban salary.
"Reprints each year are my major source of income. It will have a big impact on me," Wang said of the ban.
The publisher has not been required to recall Wang's books, but military-owned bookstores have been banned from selling them.
Pirated copies of Wang's works, such as "I'm Your Father" and "Life Fast, Die Happy", have reportedly now appeared.
Wang is the most prominent victim so far of the Communist Party's crusade to resurrect what it calls spiritual civilisation, communist jargon for toeing the party line that has been eroded by nearly two decades of economic reforms.
The Communist Party elite ended a four-day, annual closed-door plenum in Beijing on Thursday with a pledge to "use outstanding works that inspire people to cultivate citizens of a socialist (society) with ideals, morals, culture and discipline".
Chinese film censors have been dragging their feet on giving approval to the public showing of the movie "Dad", said Wang, who directed and wrote the script for the film and wrote the extremely popular television series "Stories from the Newsroom".
"Basically, it's done for," Wang said of his movie, which was completed late last year. A private film company spent 3.3 million yuan ($398,000) on the film.
Shooting of "Relations between Man and Woman" was halted in April because the movie had "mistakes and too much description of sex", said Wang, who wrote the script.
The spiritual civilisation campaign has left Chinese filmmakers at a loss and the number of movies shot so far this year has plunged to about 30 compared with an annual average of 160 in the past, a Chinese source said.
Eight movies shot by the state-owned Beijing Film Studio had met the same fate as Wang's films, the source said.
"People don't know what kind of movies can be approved," said the source who asked not to be identified.
Asked if he was repentant, Wang said: "I only have two roads to take. The first is to change my style and write things the government can tolerate and encourage. The second is to do nothing.
"It's very hard to write things the government likes...I will need two to three years to adjust," he said.
China's Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin appears to be making all the right moves to shore up his position to retain power after the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, diplomats and analysts said on Friday.
Jiang has declared war on corruption, crime and poverty -- scourges that have plagued China for centuries and led to the downfall of many a dynasty.
In his latest move, he used the party's four-day, annual closed-door plenum that ended in Beijing on Thursday to resurrect ideological puritanism -- spiritual civilisation -- which has been eroded by nearly two decades of economic reforms.
Whether Jiang would be able to stave off challenges from rivals in the party and cling to power in the post-Deng era hinged in part on the crucial 15th party congress to be held in late 1997, diplomats and analysts said.
The party's political heavyweights will be jockeying for position in the run-up to next year's congress, a five-yearly opportunity for reshuffles in the party's powerful Politburo and its yet more influential standing committee.
Chinese sources say the Communist Party is debating a plan to revive the post of chairman and to create one or two vice chairman positions -- one of which could be given to Premier Li Peng, a loose ally of Jiang whose term ends in 1998.
Li is required by the constitution to step down as premier in 1998 after serving two six-year terms and is keen to find another job to remain in the top echelons of power.
Armed with the weapon of spiritual civilisation -- communist jargon for toeing the party line -- Jiang is battling to avoid the fate of his two predecessors, analysts said.
Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang were sacked from the party's general secretary post in 1987 and 1989 respectively because their "grip on material civilisation was tight but their grip on spiritual civilisation was loose", one Chinese analyst said.
"They did not pay enough attention to ensuring that the party's position could not be challenged...that was what brought them down," an Asian diplomat said of Hu and Zhao.
A plenum communique attested to Jiang's worries. "From the start to the end, we should be resolute on tightening the grip on both," the plenum communique said.
"At no time can we sacrifice spiritual values in the name of momentary economic development," the communique said.
The spiritual civilisation campaign aims to create a communist utopia -- stamp out superstition, tighten the party's grip on media, instil politically correct values and create heroes and model workers whose orthodox Marxist behaviour the populace at large should strive to emulate.
It is hardly rousing stuff. But Jiang may be desperate.
Analysts said Jiang remained overshadowed by Deng, architect of the market-oriented economic reforms and still influential even without an official post and despite increasingly fragile health.
"In the midst of his great triumph, Jiang Zemin if he is all that powerful...there is no need for him to go out of his way to mention Deng Xiaoping," a Western diplomat said referring to the communique that tips its hat to Deng.
"Jiang Zemin...is still in consolidation mode...in the process of selling himself," he said. "The jury is still out."
Jiang is eager to consolidate his power base even after amassing the three most important positions in China -- general secretary of the Communist Party, state president and chairman of party's powerful Central Military Commission.
Many diplomats see Jiang as a transitional figure after the death of Deng, which is widely expected to trigger a scramble for power among those eager to succeed him as the de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
The mother of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan said on Monday she would defend her son against the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government and that he was prepared for a heavy sentence.
"Two defence counsels are allowed...I will be one of them," Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old researcher at a museum who has no background in law, told Reuters in an interview.
"Wang Dan also wants me to defend him," she said. Chinese laws allow accused to be defended by family members.
A court spokeswoman confirmed Wang Dan, 26, had been charged with plotting to overthrow the government but declined to give further details.
Wang Dan's mother said the court had yet to inform her of the trial date, but said it could come as early as this week.
The dissident, detained without charge since May 1995, met his mother for the first time under police surveillance at a detention centre in Beijing, the Hong Kong-based Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
"Wang Dan...was very calm and psychologically prepared for a heavy sentence," the group quoted the mother as saying. She added that she was worried about her son's health.
She told Reuters earlier that she would defend her son against the charge of collaborating with overseas subversive forces. "This charge does not stand up," she said, adding that Wang Dan had only taken a correspondence course at the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States.
"It has nothing to do with politics. I was the one who wanted him to attend the course...It has nothing to do with overthrowing the government," she said.
Asked to comment on the chances of winning the case, she said: "I'm not optimistic. But I must say it for the record. This will become history."
Relatives said last week they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang after being given one day to find one.
The lawyer retained by the family would defend the dissident against other charges in the indictment.
Wang Dan, former leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations, has been charged with the capital offence of plotting to subvert the government, based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
He was detained by police in a raid on his home in May 1995, but was not formally arrested or charged until last week.
On Friday, the family obtained a copy of the bill of indictment, which accused Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death. The minimum sentence is 10 years, although the court can show leniency if it finds extenuating circumstances.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
The mother of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan said on Monday she would defend her son in court against the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government.
"Two defence counsels are allowed...I will be one of them," Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old researcher at a museum who has no background in law, told Reuters in an interview.
"Wang Dan also wants me to defend him," she said. Chinese laws allow accused to be defended by family members.
A court spokeswoman confirmed Wang Dan, 26, had been charged with plotting to overthrow the government but declined to give further details.
Wang Dan's mother said the court had yet to inform her of the trial date, but said it could come as early as this week.
She said she would defend her son against the charge of collaborating with overseas subversive forces.
"This charge does not stand up," she said, adding that Wang Dan had only taken a correspondence course at the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States.
"It has nothing to do with politics. I was the one who wanted him to attend the course...It has nothing to do with overthrowing the government," she said.
Asked to comment on the chances of winning, she said: "I'm not optimistic. But I must say it for the record. This will become history."
Relatives said last week they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang after being given one day to find one.
The lawyer retained by the family would defend the dissident against other charges in the indictment.
Wang Dan, former leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations, has been charged with the capital offence of plotting to subvert the government, based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
He was detained by police in a raid on his home in May 1995, but was not formally arrested or charged until last week.
On Friday, the family obtained a copy of the bill of indictment, which accused Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death. The minimum sentence is 10 years, although the court can show leniency if it finds extenuating circumstances.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
The trial of prominent Chinese dissident and former student leader Wang Dan for the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government is expected to be held behind closed doors soon, a family member said on Tuesday.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court had yet to inform Wang's family of the trial date, the relative said.
The court was widely expected to fill the limited number of courtroom seats with carefully selected people to keep away foreign reporters and fellow dissidents.
"Only the people notified by the court can attend the trial. Others cannot attend," the family member said in a telephone interview.
"In reality, the trial will not be open...but the court will not admit it is not an open trial," the relative said. "It tells a group of people to attend and calls this an open trial."
A court official, contacted by telephone, declined to comment.
If last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement, was an indication, Wang's trial would be kept from public view, a political activist said. Dissidents and foreign reporters were barred from Wei's trial.
Court officials have confirmed that Wang, detained since May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
They have not given further details of the trial though one official said that Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
Relatives said last week they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang after being given one day to find one.
Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old museum researcher who has no background in law, has said she would defend her son in court. Chinese law allows an accused to be defended by a family member.
It also states that only lawyers can meet detained defendants. Wang's mother was allowed to meet the dissident at a detention centre in Beijing on Monday because she was his legal counsel.
The dissident was mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, Wang's mother told a Hong Kong-based group that monitors human rights in China.
"Wang Dan said he has not done anything wrong...He is very calm...and psychologically prepared for a heavy sentence," the group quoted the mother as saying.
"She is very worried about his health," the group said.
It added that Wang had back, throat and prostate problems.
"In the condition that Wang Dan is in, it would be difficult for him to hold out under another long prison sentence," it quoted the mother as saying.
Wang, 26, has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted Wei Jingsheng implicated Wang.
The verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China's flamboyant tycoon Mou Qizhong is hounded by creditors, faces lawsuits and investigation for alleged irregularities and cannot leave the country, company officials said.
The embattled chairman of the Land Economic Group, who has been identified by local media as China's second richest man, was down but not out and was counting on Russian-made satellites to bail him out of financial trouble, they said.
"We're in a crisis," Chen Fang, spokeswoman for Mou, told Reuters late on Monday. Mou declined repeated requests for an interview.
Domestic creditors had demanded repayment of loans, group officials said. Mou's Land Economic Group owes 200 million yuan ($24.1 million) at home and another 200 million yuan in Hong Kong and Russia.
"Some creditors...have asked for their money back even before the maturity date," Chen said, adding that the company was planning to repay the loans gradually.
Domestic banks had refused to grant Mou new loans and the group had given up seeking loans from Chinese banks. "Abruptly recalling loans could be fatal," Chen said in an interview.
At least one investor had demanded its money back, but agreed to convert its equity into a loan, company officials said.
"The major problem we're facing now is circulating funds getting cut off... As a result, many projects are held up," Chen said.
Government authorities had cleared Mou of suspicion of tax evasion and of using unlawful funds but he remained under investigation for other unspecified irregularities, company officials said.
The authorities had been dragging their feet on renewing his passport apparently out of fear that he may flee the country and join his wife and three sons in the United States. Mou hopes to visit the United States next month.
Salaries of employees were slashed to 270 yuan a month -- China's urban minimum wage -- in July and August and were 600 yuan in September from an average of 2,000 yuan a month in the past, the officials said. About 50 people have resigned, leaving some 300.
A contractor in Inner Mongolia had sued the Land Group for allegedly defaulting on a contract, and court officials foreclosed on company cars and office equipment in August.
"Many people say that this could be what is called in Buddhism an inexorable doom for Mr Mou or the Land Group," Chen said.
Chen blamed the woes of Mou on the media "surrounding and attacking" him since March as well as a smear campaign by former employees and a government credit squeeze to curb inflation.
"But the Land Group will not collapse," she said.
Mou plans to raise an unspecified amount of money through a planned share issue, for two Russian-made GALS communications satellites he owns, on the Hong Kong stock exchange, officials said.
The first was launched in January 1994 and the second in November 1995. Russia launched both satellites in Kazakhstan.
In addition, Mou has bought a 30 percent stake in a company that will develop, manufacture and launch two Russian-made Intersputnik communications satellites.
The first of the two satellites is due to be launched from Kazakhstan in late 1998.
The satellites were expected to bring Mou net profits of $500 million and bail him out of his current crisis, Chen said.
The group has assets worth 1.2 billion yuan and liabilities of just 400 million yuan.
It is not Mou's first crisis. He was sentenced to death but eluded execution in the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution for criticising chairman Mao Zedong.
Mou was released from prison in 1979 and established his company the following year. He was arrested again and jailed for one year on a charge of speculating in the early 1980s.
He ran up huge debts in the mid 1980s but managed to bounce back by importing small refrigerators from South Korea at low tariff rates, raking in millions of yuan.
China sent a senior official to attend a reception at the Ukraine embassy on Friday despite a diplomatic rift over a visit to Kiev by Taiwan's vice president Lien Chan.
But an apparent guest list mix-up left both sides unsure over who would represent Beijing at the reception, held to mark Ukraine's independence day.
Ukraine's ambassador thought Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister Tian Zengpei would attend, but the Chinese thought it was Vice-Foreign Minister Zhang Deguang.
Zhang, however, fell ill and Vice-Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan showed up instead.
The confusion followed Taiwan Vice President Lien Chan's three-day trip this week to Ukraine which infuriated Beijing.
"It was a misunderstanding...a mix-up," Ukrainian Minister-Counsellor Leonid Leshchenko told Reuters, referring to the guest list.
Asked if he saw it as an intentional slap on the wrist, Leshchenko shook his head and said: "No, no no."
A Chinese Foreign Ministry protocol officer said Tian, the vice-minister that the Ukrainians were expecting, was abroad.
Ukrainian diplomats noted that Tang, the vice-minister who attended, was filling in for Tian as the acting first vice-minister and was actually higher in rank than the person who fell ill.
Ukraine's Ambassador Anatoly Plyushko emerged from a half-hour chat with Vice-Minister Tang, and said the vice-minister told him that China attached "great attention to bilateral relations" and "hoped to continue to develop" ties.
Plyushko said the vice-minister did not raise the issue of Lien's three-day Kiev visit.
"All Chinese guests...invited came," Plyushko said. "This is evidence...(of) their attitude towards our relations. I'm optimistic."
The atmosphere was less pleasant on Wednesday when the Chinese Foreign Ministry summoned Plyushko to protest against Lien's trip.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province with no right to conduct foreign relations on its own, and has sought to push it into diplomatic isolation since a civil war separated them in 1949.
The former Soviet republic of Ukraine recognises China but not Taiwan.
In apparent retaliation against Lien's visit, Chinese State Councillor Li Tieying, a member of the powerful Politburo of the ruling Communist Party, has postponed a visit to Ukraine.
In Kiev, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Hennady Udovenko took a shot at Beijing on Thursday, saying China had over-reacted to Lien's visit and calling Beijing's protest "out of proportion".
A son-in-law of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping has resigned as director of the armament department of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Chinese sources with close ties to the military said on Sunday.
Major General He Ping, husband of Deng's youngest daughter Deng Rong, quit the post recently after his hopes for promotion were dashed, one source said.
"He Ping was unhappy... He wanted to become deputy chief of general staff, but the Central Military Commission would only make him assistant chief of general staff initially," the source, who requested anonymity, told Reuters.
The assistant chief of general staff is one rank below the deputy chief of general staff.
Another source said a replacement had been named to succeed He Ping as director of the armament department, which supplies equipment to the three million-strong PLA.
The commission's refusal to give Deng's son-in-law the post he wanted was not so much a blow to the first family as it was a boost to the position of Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin.
"It was not so much as a challenge to Deng Xiaoping. Rather, it was a sign that Jiang Zemin is now more powerful," the second source said.
The first source agreed. "Jiang Zemin does not have to do everything Deng Xiaoping says," the source said of the commission's decision not to promote He Ping to deputy chief of general staff.
Jiang, who is chairman of the commission, has moved in recent years to shore up his position by appointing allies to key military positions and shrug off Deng's shadow.
Deng, 92, no longer holds any office but remains highly influential. He has not been seen in public since early 1994.
The paramount leader vouched for his son-in-law, whose company was alleged to have been involved in the smuggling of the biggest haul of automatic weapons in U.S. history.
"Deng Xiaoping spoke. He said: 'It was not He Ping's fault'... He Ping does not have any more problems," the first source said of the arms smuggling scandal.
"It was a trap by the United States," the source said of the arms seizure. Many communist officials harbour deep suspicions of the United States and the view that the arms seizure was a U.S. conspiracy to undermine China.
China's two top government-run arms merchants, Polytechnologies Ltd and China North Industries Corp (Norinco), have rejected U.S. charges they were involved in the scandal.
He Ping is president of Poly Group, which is owned by the PLA's armament department. Poly Group subsidiary Polytechnologies is a joint venture with China's flagship multinational China International Trust and Investment Co and headed by Wang Jun, son of a late vice-president and close associate of Deng.
Norinco is a civilian organisation that has no direct relationship with the army but supplies it with arms.
In March, U.S. federal agents seized a shipment of 2,000 AK-47 fully automatic machine guns and 4,000 ammunition magazines, with a street value of more than $4 million.
U.S. agents arrested at least seven people, including executives of Norinco, in May and charged them with involvement in the ring.
The seizure was the culmination of a 16-month investigation of senior officials, based in both the United States and China, of Norinco and Polytechnologies.
The suspects had offered to sell much more powerful weapons to undercover agents, including mortars, rocket launchers, machineguns and a surface-to-air missile, U.S. officials have said.
China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, reported to be in fragile health, was absent from a rally on Tuesday to pay tribute to him and other survivors of the 1934-36 Long March.
Deng, 92, one of about 700 surviving veterans of the Red Army who trekked 9,650 km (6,000 miles) across China on foot to flee Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops, did not appear on state television which showed the 45-minute rally live.
Deng, who no longer holds any office but is believed to remain highly influential, has not been seen in public since early 1994.
His health is a matter of intense speculation in China, Hong Kong and the Asian region because his death is expected to trigger a scramble for power among those eager to succeed him as de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
The official line is that Deng is in good health for a man of his age.
Extensive preparations were made last year for Deng to grace official celebrations to mark the 50th anniversary of the World War Two victory against Japan, but his scheduled appearance was cancelled at the last minute, Chinese sources said.
The Long March rally was seen by some analysts as a show of support for Deng's successor, Communist Party boss and state president Jiang Zemin, who has been eager to shrug off the patriarch's shadow.
"It was staged to show Jiang has the support of military from the old to the present and future generations," one Chinese analyst said.
Long March survivors, including former state president and Jiang's bitter rival Yang Shangkun, were at the rally. A representative of the three million-strong People's Liberation Army pledged to follow Jiang's leadership.
Eight Young Pioneers -- China's version of boy and girl scouts -- recited poems at the rally at the Great Hall of the People in central Beijing adjacent to Tiananmen Square.
Wearing his trademark army uniform with no stars or stripes, Jiang urged the ruling Communist Party to inherit the spirit of the Long March.
"The spirit of the Long March...is a strong spiritual force that guarantees our walking from victory to victory," Jiang said, reading from a prepared statement.
The gruelling Long March slashed the Red Army's numbers to about 7,000 from 100,000, but survivors were hardened and went on to defeat and drive Chiang and his troops into exile in Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
"The road after the revolution is even longer and the work greater and tougher," Jiang said.
Jiang has declared war on crime, corruption and poverty -- problems plaguing China today -- and embarked on a crusade to resurrect socialist ethics, which have been eroded by almost two decades of economic reforms.
He paid little tribute to his mentor, mentioning Deng only twice in his lengthy speech.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, splashed on its front page a photograph showing portraits of Jiang, Deng and chairman Mao Zedong hanging over a cultural performance on Monday evening to mark the anniversary.
China on Tuesday slammed Taiwan for failing to crack down on a new opposition party seeking independence for the island and warned that separatism was "a road to death".
"Not only do the Taiwan authorities fail to ban the formation of the Taiwan Independence Party, but they also tolerate it," a spokesman for the Taiwan Affairs Office under the State Council, or cabinet, said.
"The self-proclaimed anti-independence stand of the Taiwan authorities is a double-faced practice that deceives others as well as themselves," the official People's Daily quoted the spokesman as saying.
Beijing has regarded Taiwan as a rebel province since Mao Zedong's Red Army defeated and drove Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops into exile in Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
A group of Taiwanese activists plan to break away from Taiwan's main opposition party and form the Taiwan Independence Party on December 12.
China has threatened to invade if Taiwan declared independence. China conducted missile tests and war games off Taiwan last March in the run-up to the island's first direct presidential elections to cow Taipei into abandoning any dreams of independence.
"Taiwan independence is a road to death that cannot be walked because it is blocked," the spokesman said.
The spokesman described the party as a "reactional political organisation" with the explicit purpose of splitting the motherland.
"The Taiwan authorities should adopt realistic anti-independence action as soon as possible. Compatriots on the two sides are waiting to see," the spokesman said.
"The Chinese government and the Chinese people will definitely not sit back idly and do nothing about it," the spokesman warned.
"Their scheme will never succeed," he said of the new party's drive for independence.
Taiwan says it is committed to reunification, but stresses that this cannot be achieved overnight and says China must democratise.
Beijing's criticism came a day after Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui blamed China for deadlocked relations between the two.
Referring to the Communist authorities, Lee said in a speech on Monday: "They adopted a hegemonic attitude and stubborn policy toward Taiwan, singlehandedly blocked the development of history and caused the stalemate of cross-Strait relations."
The island maintains an official policy of anti-independence, but has decriminalised advocacy of independence, saying such calls are within the bounds of freedom of speech.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei, which began to thaw in the late 1980s, took an icy plunge after a landmark, private visit by Lee to the United States in June 1995.
China, which has sought to push Taiwan into diplomatic isolation, saw the trip as a bid to raise the island's international profile.
Beijing has stepped up its reunification overture in recent months, calling for political talks to end almost five decades of hostility.
China unilaterally introduced a series of regulations last August to pave the way for direct shipping links with Taiwan.
Taiwan has banned direct air and shipping links with China since 1949, but allows indirect links through Hong Kong or third countries. Taiwan is reluctant to lift the ban lest the island become an economic hostage to China.
China demanded on Monday that the United States cancel plans to sell Stinger missiles, launchers and other weapons to Taiwan to prevent "new damage" to slowly recovering Sino-U.S. relations.
"We ask the U.S. side...to cancel plans to sell missiles to Taiwan to prevent creating new damage to Sino-U.S. relations," a Foreign Ministry spokesman told Reuters.
Beijing has regarded Taiwan as a renegade province since the end of the civil war in 1949. It opposes the sale of weapons to the island.
The United States should take Sino-U.S. relations into account and live up to its promise regarding the sale of weapons to Taiwan, the spokesman said without elaborating. Washington has agreed to reduce weapons sales to Taiwan.
Rejecting a similar demand by China on August 15, the U.S. Defence Department notified Congress last Friday of plans to sell Stinger missiles, launchers and other weapons to Taiwan.
U.S. officials said the weapons were defensive and the sale would not affect the basic military balance in the region.
The Pentagon said Taiwan wanted to buy 1,299 Stinger missiles, 74 guided missile launchers, 74 flight trainer Stinger missiles, 96 jeep-like Humvee vehicles and 500 rounds of .50 calibre ammunition for an estimated $420 million.
The principal contractors are the Hughes Missile Systems Co., Boeing Missile and Space Systems Co. and AM General.
Such sales must be made through the U.S. Defence Department, not directly by contractors, and Congress must be notified in case it wants to veto the sale.
Sino-U.S. ties have see-sawed in recent years over disputes ranging from human rights abuses and widespread copyright piracy in China to alleged nuclear proliferation by Beijing.
The ties plunged to new depths over the last year in a row over a landmark trip by Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to the United States in June 1995.
Earlier this month, Beijing warned Washington that a U.S. stopover by Taiwan's Vice-President Lien Chan could cause new damage to slowly recovering ties.
However, in a sign that China was eager to prevent Lien's visit from harming slowly warming relations, Beijing refrained from further comment while Lien was in the United States.
Ties between Beijing and Washington were set on better footing after a visit to Beijing by U.S. National Security Adviser Anthony Lake in July.
The trip laid the groundwork for an exchange of high-level visits later in the year, with U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher invited to China in November and Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian due to go to Washington before the end of December.
An exchange of visits by Chinese President Jiang Zemin and U.S. President Bill Clinton could go ahead next year, if Clinton wins re-election in November.
Chinese officials have said they expect Christopher's visit, his first since a 1994 trip that stumbled badly over human rights, to go smoothly with both sides keen to remove obstacles in their relations.
In a separate development that could strain Sino-U.S. ties, the Washington Post reported on Sunday that U.S. intelligence officials had concluded that Pakistan was secretly building a medium-range missile factory near Islamabad using Chinese blueprints and equipment.
Asked to comment on the report, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said: "The report is totally groundless."
China said on Friday that Taiwan was a pawn and toy of hostile Western forces out to weaken and divide the country and thwart its development.
"Taiwan...acts as a pawn of international anti-Chinese forces, a toy in the hands of others," said a front-page commentary in the People's Daily, the ruling Communist Party's official newspaper.
The commentary, issued to mark the 25th anniversary of Beijing's ousting of Taipei from the United Nations, accused Taiwan of collaborating with forces hostile towards China to try to regain admission to the world body.
"Some Western forces have ceaselessly played the 'human rights card', 'Tibet card' to limit China's development," the commentary said.
"They see the Taiwan issue as one of their trump cards -- an important means of weakening and dividing China," it said without naming any countries but implying the United States.
In September, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a non-binding resolution supporting Taiwan's efforts to rejoin the United Nations, enraging Beijing.
China, which regards Taiwan as a rebel province, maintains that the issue was settled once and for all in 1971 when Taipei was replaced by Beijing at the United Nations.
The commentary said countries that have helped Taiwan with its bid to regain admission to the United Nations were shortsighted like "rats which can only see an inch in front of their eyes".
It urged Taiwan's allies, mainly Central American, African and Caribbean countries, to stop "foolish activities in the interest of others".
For the fourth consecutive year, China and its supporters blocked moves in the General Assembly in September to consider U.N. membership for wealthy but diplomatically isolated Taiwan.
China considers any move to give Taiwan U.N. membership an encroachment on its sovereignty and an interference in its internal affairs.
Beijing and Taipei have been diplomatic rivals since Mao Zedong's Red Army defeated Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists and forced them to flee to Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
Beijing's communist rulers have sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation to force it into reunification. Almost 160 countries recognise Beijing, while 30 have diplomatic relations with Taiwan.
Both communist Beijing and capitalist Taipei agree to reunify one day, albeit on different terms. China has threatened to invade if the island declares independence.
The commentary said Taiwan's offer to give $1.0 billion to the United Nations on admission into the world body had become an "international joke".
It jeered at the argument that Taiwan deserved a seat as it was now democratic and economically prosperous, saying the island was "deceiving others and itself".
"No matter what political system Taiwan implemented or what level of economic development it attained...regaining admission to the United Nations would be purely a dream," it said.
A group of foreign legal experts has asked China for permission to observe next week's trial of detained dissident Wang Dan, a human rights group said on Saturday.
Wang faces the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum sentence of 10 years in prison.
The legal team consists of French senator Robert Badinter, former U.S. attorneys-general Nicholas Katzenback and Richard Thornburgh and former Canadian solicitor-general Warren Allmand, the New York-based Human Rights Watch said.
"The request ... is in part to see whether the right of Wang Dan to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal ... is respected," the human rights group said.
Wang, 26, who vanished into detention in May 1995, would plead not guilty at his Beijing Intermediate People's Court trial which opens on Wednesday, family members have said.
The human rights group said the chances of China allowing the foreign legal experts to observe the trial were slim. "Admittance to the courtroom is often denied to ... journalists and other 'outsiders' on grounds that the courtroom is 'too small'," Human Rights Watch said.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister have been allowed to sit in.
The court has refused to give details of Wang's trial other than the fact that he has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government, but one official has said Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
Wang's mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, though she has said his health has deteriorated during his detention.
Human Rights Watch was not optimistic about an acquittal. "He has not had adequate time to prepare a defence," it said in a statement made available to Reuters by facsimile.
"Chinese criminal trials seldom respect the presumption of innocence, and defence lawyers are generally restricted to arguing mitigating circumstances for a reduced sentence," the group said.
Wang's family have found a lawyer willing to defend the former student leader after being given just one day in which to do so.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He had been active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has in recent months cracked down on its tiny band of remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been imprisoned.
Beijing Mayor Li Qiyan is to step down in a long-delayed reshuffle after the downfall of his mentor, the Chinese capital's disgraced Communist Party boss Chen Xitong, sources with close ties to the city government said on Sunday.
Li, 58, mayor of Beijing since 1993, would become a vice-minister of labour and could eventually replace Li Boyong, 62, as labour minister, said the sources who asked not to be identified. The two Lis are not related.
Li Qiyan's departure was widely expected after one of his vice-mayors came under investigation for economic crimes and committed suicide in April 1995.
The suicide shocked the nation and led to the downfall of Li's mentor, Chen Xitong, who has since disappeared from the public eye.
Chen resigned as Beijing's Communist Party boss and was later sacked from the Politburo, becoming the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the communists came to power in 1949.
Officials say Chen was himself still under investigation for possible wrongdoing.
The city government had been virtually paralysed since Chen's disgrace, the sources said.
"After Chen Xitong stepped down, the (city) government lost its credibility ... and could maintain only the most basic operation," one source told Reuters. "It could not embark on huge projects ... It could not do anything."
Li would be replaced by Jia Qinglin, 56, party secretary of the southeastern province of Fujian, the sources said.
Jia arrived in Beijing last week to take up his new post as acting mayor, the sources said. Jia is expected to formally become the capital's mayor after his nomination is approved by the Beijing People's Congress.
In the run-up to the party's 15th congress next year, Jia could be promoted to Beijing's Communist Party secretary and land a seat in the party's powerful Politburo, they said.
The vice-mayor who committed suicide was found to have used his position to amass 116 houses illegally and build himself a villa on the outskirts of the city. He also masterminded a $37 million embezzlement and graft scam, officials have said.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus which threatened the party. Courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases.
Earlier this month, prosecutors filed charges of corruption against 30 people, including Zhou Beifang, former head of two publicly listed Hong Kong affiliates of a China steel giant, and two former officials of the Beijing city government.
The announcement of the charges against Zhou was among the first against one of China's so-called "princelings", the popular sobriquet applied to the children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence.
Zhou, detained in February, 1995, is the son of Zhou Guanwu, former chairman and Communist Party secretary of Beijing's giant Capital Iron and Steel Corporation, also known as Shougang, and among the largest conglomerates in China.
The mayor of China's capital resigned on Tuesday in a reshuffle that had been expected since the downfall last year of his mentor, disgraced Beijing Communist Party boss Chen Xitong, in a corruption scandal.
The Beijing People's Congress had approved the resignation of city mayor Li Qiyan, the official Xinhua news agency said.
It did not explain why Li, 58, was stepping down, saying only that he would become secretary of the Labour Ministry's Communist Party committee.
Chinese sources have said Li Qiyan could eventually replace Li Boyong as labour minister. The two men have the same surname but are not related.
Diplomats and Chinese sources said Li was forced to step down because of his close links to Chen, who resigned as Beijing party boss in April 1995 after his protege, a vice-mayor, came under investigation for economic crimes and committed suicide.
"Li Qiyan had been closely associated with Chen Xitong...and Li Qiyan's departure was inevitable," a Western diplomat said.
"When revelations about the extent of corruption in the Beijing government became public, sweeping changes of the Beijing leadership were required but could not be done in one go in the interest of preserving stability," the diplomat said.
Chinese sources said the city government had been virtually paralysed since Chen's downfall and that authorities had decided they could no longer delay naming a new mayor.
Chen was sacked from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the communists came to power in 1949.
He has since disappeared from public view and has come under investigation for possible wrongdoing.
It was not known if Li was under investigation.
Xinhua said the Beijing People's Congress, or city council, had approved the appointment of Jia Qinglin, 56, as vice and acting mayor of the nation's capital.
The Central Committee of the Communist Party named Jia to the post of vice secretary of Beijing's party committee.
Jia had resigned as party secretary of the southeastern province of Fujian and was replaced by Fujian Governor Chen Mingyi, Xinhua said.
Fujian Vice-Governor He Guoqiang would replace Chen as the provincial governor, it said.
In the run-up to the party's 15th congress next year, Jia could be promoted to chief of the Beijing municipal party committee and even land a seat in the Politburo, Chinese sources have said.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Wang Baosen, the vice-mayor who committed suicide was found to have used his position to amass 116 houses illegally and build himself a villa on the outskirts of the city. He also masterminded a $37 million embezzlement and graft scam, officials have said.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus that threatened the party. Courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases.
One of China's most prominent dissidents, Wang Dan, will likely receive a harsh sentence for the charge of plotting to overthrow the government, his mother said on Tuesday.
Wang would plead not guilty to the capital charge when his trial at the Beijing Intermediate People's Court begins on Wednesday, said the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun.
"The court...giving my son a harsh sentence even though he is innocent is very likely to happen," Wang Lingyun told Reuters. "I dare not rule it out."
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days, adding that family members have been under surveillance in recent weeks.
Wang Dan, 26, who vanished into detention in May 1995, faces a minimum of 10 years in prison and a maximum penalty of death for allegedly plotting to overthrow the government.
The court has refused to give details of Wang's trial other than that the dissident has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government. But one official has said Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of an acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
The dissident's family has found a lawyer willing to defend the former student leader after being given just one day in which to do so.
The human rights group said Chinese criminal trials seldom respect the presumption of innocence, and defence lawyers are generally restricted to arguing mitigating circumstances for a reduced sentence.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
The Chinese authorities have been quiet on a request by the U.S. Embassy in Beijing to send observers to Wang's trial, diplomats said.
French senator Robert Badinter, former U.S. attorneys general Nicholas Katzenback and Richard Thornburgh, and former Canadian solicitor-general Warren Allmand have also said they want to observe Wang's trial.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang on Tuesday shrugged off questions from reporters about the status of the requests, saying Wang's trial was China's internal affairs.
Beijing has repeatedly come under fire from the West for human rights abuses. It says foreign intervention in China's internal affairs is not welcomed.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health has deteriorated during his detention.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
China began the trial of prominent dissident and former student leader Wang Dan on Wednesday on the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government, a court official said.
"The trial started at 9.00 a.m. (0100 GMT)," said an official of the Beijing People's Intermediate Court reached by telephone. He declined to give further details.
Security was tight around the court building in western Beijing, with dozens of police preventing the public from approaching the building and manning roadblocks to prevent access.
The father of the former student leader protested his son's innocence just hours before the start of the proceedings and said the family would not give in to the authorities.
"He is definitely innocent," Wang Xianzeng told reporters as he left his home with the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun, to go to the court. "It just depends on whether the government wants to convict him or not."
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
"I'm not optimistic about the results," Wang Xianzeng said. "We will definitely appeal... We will not give in.
"Speech can't overthrow the government," he said.
The court indictment against Wang, 27, includes the charge that his writings in foreign publications were evidence of his plot to try to overthrow the government.
He is also accused of accepting foreign funds, of colluding with subversives living overseas and of conspiring with domestic plotters to organise the overthrow of the government.
Wang Lingyun said on Tuesday she expected Wang to receive a harsh sentence although he would plead not guilty.
The former student leader faces a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated since he vanished into detention in May 1995.
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days. Family members had been under surveillance for several weeks, she added.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
"The fact is that China's urban dissident movement...has in effect been comprehensively smashed," it said in a statement.
Wang's court appearance was expected to resemble the in-camera proceedings last December against Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
The father of Chinese dissident Wang Dan protested his son's innocence on Wednesday, just hours before the start of the former student leader's trial, and said the family would not give in to the authorities.
"He is definitely innocent," Wang Xianzeng told reporters as he left his home to go to the court.
The trial of Wang Dan, 27, on the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government was due to begin on Wednesday morning at the Beijing People's Intermediate Court.
The public was effectively barred from the court, which was surrounded by police who had set up roadblocks across all major roads leading to the building.
"It just depends on whether the government wants to convict him or not," Wang Xianzeng told reporters.
"I'm not optimistic about the results... We will definitely appeal... We will not give in," he said.
"Speech can't overthrow the government," he said.
The court charges against Wang say that his writings in foreign publications are part of evidence to back up the charge that he had tried to overthrow the government.
His mother, Wang Lingyun, said on Tuesday she expected Wang to receive a harsh sentence although he would plead not guilty to the capital charge.
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days. Family members had been under surveillance for several weeks, she added.
The former student leader, who vanished into detention in May 1995, faces a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
His family found a lawyer willing to defend the dissident after being given just one day in which to do so.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated since he was detained in May 1995.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
"The fact is that China's urban dissident movement...has in effect been comprehensively smashed," it said in a statement.
"At least where political dissidents are concerned, all the judicial signs thus far point...to intensified repression by the country's state security forces," it said, calling for a freeze on trade missions from the United States, Europe, Japan and Australia.
Wang's court appearance was expected to resemble the in-camera proceedings last December against Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
China called on Taiwan on Tuesday to show goodwill by lifting a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links, saying attempts by the island nation to block such links would be futile.
"Obstructing the three links between the two sides...will be futile...is against the will of the people on both sides," a commentary by the Xinhua news agency said of Taiwan's ban on direct trade, transport and mail links with China.
"(We) hope the Taiwan authorities can make a pragmatic, goodwill response," said the commentary carried by major newspapers on Tuesday.
Last week, China introduced a series of regulations to pave the way for direct shipping links.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links with China since Mao Zedong's communist army defeated and drove Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops to the island at the end of a civil war in 1949.
Indirect links between the two sides have been allowed since the late 1980s through Hong Kong or a third country.
The commentary accused the Taiwan authorities of creating obstacles to direct trade and transport links in recent years, saying this would not be conducive to prospects for peaceful reunification. The commentary did not explain how it would not be conducive.
China regards Taiwan as a renegade province and has threatened to invade if the island declared independence. It has also sought to push Taipei into diplomatic isolation.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, clamour for direct trade and transport links, but Taiwan has been reluctant to lift the ban, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
Taiwan says it is committed to reunification but stresses this cannot be achieved overnight.
Last week China heaped pressure on Taiwan by offering to hold political talks to end almost five decades of hostility.
Nearly 80 prominent Taiwanese business leaders and politicians were scheduled to arrive in Beijing on Tuesday for a a high-profile, 12-day visit, despite reservations voiced by the island's leaders about depending too heavily on China.
The visit has aroused attention because the delegation is led by Kao Ching-yuan, a senior member of Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party and vice-chairman of President Enterprises, the island's biggest investor in China.
Taiwanese newspapers said Kao would meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin and other senior officials.
The trip comes less than two weeks after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui called for a review of economic policy toward China with the aim of avoiding over dependence on the mainland.
The China Times Express newspaper in Taipei said on Sunday that Taiwan's economic planners had drawn up measures -- including contingency plans to restrict Taiwanese investment on the mainland -- if Taiwan-China relations deteriorate.
The Taiwanese delegation would be the largest to visit China since easing tensions across the Taiwan Strait began to fray in mid-1995 over a landmark, private visit by Taiwan's President Lee to the United States.
In apparent retaliation, China denounced Lee and held intimidatory war games off Taiwan before the island's historic presidential elections in March in which Lee was re-elected.
Chinese dissident Wang Dan has appealed against his 11-year jail sentence for plotting to subvert the government, but his mother said on Tuesday she held little hope of an acquittal or a lighter sentence.
Wang Lingyun said she hoped U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and German President Roman Herzog would raise her son's predicament in their meetings with Chinese leaders when they visit China later this month.
"Wang Dan... should be acquitted because... he's innocent," she told Reuters by telephone. "We hope for an acquittal or a reduced sentence... but it is unlikely."
Wang Lingyun, who acted as one of two defence lawyers in her son's case, said court officials had asked her to submit a written defence for the appeal and that family members may not be allowed to attend the appeals court trial.
Experts on China's legal system have said the chances of the appeals court overturning the lower court's verdict were slim.
An official of the Beijing Higher People's Court said the 27-year-old dissident had filed his appeal. She declined to provide further details.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court took less than four hours last Wednesday to convict and sentence Wang, who had already served four years in prison for his role as a leader of the 1989 student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
On Monday, visiting Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson said he had expressed his disapproval to Chinese Premier Li Peng over the jailing of Wang.
A foreign ministry spokesman defended China at a news briefing on Tuesday, saying Beijing would not impose its laws on others and that foreign countries should take a similar stance.
The spokesman also said China opposed using human rights as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of any country.
An international human rights group denounced what it said was the "secret trial" of Wang on a trumped-up charge.
"What (the court) brought to bear on Wang Dan was a secret trial in which the facts were deliberately hidden and the truth distorted," the New York-based Human Rights in China said in a statement made available to Reuters by facsimile.
"A fabricated charge was used to wantonly convict Wang Dan," the group said. "Wang Dan's case... is suppression and persecution of thought and speech by the Chinese government."
When told during the trial of his right to seek the removal of any biased judges, Wang demanded all judges and prosecutors be removed from the case. The tribunal rejected his request after a few minutes of deliberation, the group said.
China said it was an open and fair trial but Human Rights in China said no foreign reporters, diplomats or other international observers were allowed to attend.
The group said more than 10 people wearing tags identifying themselves as reporters attended the trial but there was no mention of the conviction in the local Chinese-language media.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling pro-democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
Human Rights in China accused the official Xinhua news agency of preparing English-language stories about the results of the trial and an interview with the chief judge even before the verdict was delivered.
Asked to comment, an official of the foreign affairs office of Xinhua said: "It is not necessary to find out whether the story was prepared before or after the sentencing... News agencies have different ways and practices of releasing news."
After breaking the news of Wang's conviction, it took Xinhua only 1-1/2 hours to put out a 54-paragraph story on the interview with the chief judge.
Leading Chinese dissident Chen Ziming has been placed under tight police surveillance after his release on medical parole and needs permission to consult a doctor, a relative said on Thursday.
"Some conditions (after his parole) are not as good as when (he) was in prison," the dissident's sister, Chen Zihua, said after meeting him earlier on Thursday at his home.
"When he was in prison he could still go downstairs for some air," she said in a telephone interview. "(Now) he can't even go downstairs to get some sun... He cannot go out."
Chen Ziming has been under tight police surveillance since he was released on medical parole and returned to his eighth-floor Beijing home late on Wednesday.
Asked about Chen's plans, the sister said he did not talk about anything besides his wish to get medical treatment.
The dissident needs police permission to see a doctor, the sister said. He has heart, liver and digestion problems. He had been treated for cancer.
He is barred from talking to foreign reporters. Uniformed and plainclothes police on Thursday prevented reporters from approaching Chen's home and that of his parents.
Asked if the dissident was under house arrest, Chen's sister said: "(I'm) afraid it's a little graver than that. It's just moving the prison from one place to another."
But his release was a welcome surprise to the family.
"We felt surprised to a certain degree. Of course, (we) are happy (he) could be released," the sister said. "His medical parole...was a little unexpected."
Chen, 44, was sentenced to 13 years in prison in 1991 for engaging in "counter-revolutionary", or subversive, activities during a student-led campaign for democracy that was centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Chen had been singled out by Beijing authorities as the "black hand" behind-the-scenes organiser of the demonstrations, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
He won medical parole in 1994 in a move widely seen as part of a successful bid by Beijing to persuade Washington not to revoke China's Most Favoured Nation trade status on grounds of persistent human rights violations.
Chen was returned to prison on June 25, 1995, after joining calls for Beijing to release political prisoners and reverse its verdict that the Tiananmen Square protests were seditious.
His release on Wednesday came seven days after a Beijing court took less than four hours to convict former student leader Wang Dan and sentence him to 11 years in prison for plotting to subvert the government.
Wang's imprisonment was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's embattled dissidents, most of whom were already either in exile or serving long terms in administrative detention or prison.
Asked if Chen's release was a gift to U.S. President Bill Clinton on his re-election, the sister said: "It gives (Clinton) face."
Human rights have long been a major irritant in Sino-U.S. ties already strained by disputes over trade, copyright piracy, arms proliferation and Taiwan.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to travel to Beijing this month for a visit widely seen as a vital step toward rebuilding the cross-Pacific relationship.
China announced on Saturday a massive restructuring of one of its biggest conglomerates after reportedly meting out a suspended death sentence to the son of the former company chairman, one of the country's ruling elite.
State media announced the restructuring of Capital Iron, or Shougang, on Saturday but made no mention of the suspended death sentence handed down to Zhou Beifang, the former head of two of the steel giant's Hong Kong-listed affiliates.
A Beijing court gave Zhou the suspended death sentence for corruption as part of China's highly-publicised anti-graft campaign launched last year, a Chinese source said on Saturday.
The sentence was the heaviest handed down in recent years to one of China's so-called "princelings", the popular sobriquet applied to the children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence.
Shougang, one of China's biggest conglomerates, was thrust into the limelight after Zhou's detention in February 1995.
The arrest of a man symbolising Beijing's efforts to wield capitalist influence while retaining a socialist veneer underlined the vulnerability of that system to nepotism and abuse.
Zhou Beifang's father, Zhou Guanwu, 78, resigned as chairman and Communist Party secretary of Shougang in February 1995, citing old age following his son's detention.
The Zhous have close ties to the family of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Last month, prosecutors filed charges of corruption against 30 people, including Zhou Beifang and two former officials of the Beijing city government. No other details of the case were available.
Chinese courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases. Suspended death sentences are often commuted to life imprisonment after two years.
Court officials could not be reached for comment on the sentencing.
The China Daily said the restructuring of Shougang draws a clear line between the property rights, responsibility and management of the parent company and subsidiary.
In the past, a large percentage of the parent company's profits went to branch companies, many of which are running in the red, the newspaper said.
Shougang's parent company would gradually cut off financial subsidies to subsidiaries which would be forced to sink or swim in the market economy as part of the restructuring programme.
"We will provide financial support for our subsidiaries for a few years, helping them in investment, finance and discharge of their debts based on an appraisal of their fixed assets," Bi Qun, Communist Party secretary of Shougang, told the newspaper.
"Once that is done the subsidiary companies will develop strategies to stop losing money and begin to make profits," Bi was quoted as saying.
The number of employees of the parent company would be gradually slashed to 58,000, or one-fourth of the group's total, the Xinhua news agency said. It gave no timetable.
The group's 27 subsidiaries would employ 176,000 people.
The group registered 1.653 billion yuan ($199 million) in pre-tax profits in the first 10 months of 1996, Xinhua said. It gave no comparative figures.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus that threatened the party.
Two Chinese magazines are struggling for survival after being targeted in a crusade by China's propaganda tsars to cleanse the media of liberal influences, Chinese sources said.
"Focus" magazine in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen has suspended publication for two issues after a Hong Kong newspaper reported the magazine defied propaganda tsars and ran a cover story on the anniversary of the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, the sources said.
The Propaganda Department of the Communist Party had frowned on any commemoration of the decade of turmoil unleashed by revolutionary leader Mao Zedong to purge political rivals and infuse the nation with renewed ideological vigour.
A writer for the magazine said the suspension was due to a Hong Kong newspaper report of the article's publication.
"Had it not been for the foreign report, the magazine would not have suffered this kind of setback," said the writers, peaking anonymously "This was a kind of punishment...by the party."
In a telephone interview, Li Mei, publisher of Focus, disputed this assessment, saying the suspension was linked to unrelated financial trouble.
Other Chinese sources said the problems at "Focus" stemmed from the Communist Party's clampdown on publications and authors who dare to break away from a stultifying diet of state-approved fare.
"If a publication takes a detour (from the party line), it will be suspended for restructuring. There will be no exceptions," one source quoted propaganda tsars as saying.
Propaganda tsars are also debating the fate of the Beijing-based magazine "Orient" for publishing a series of book reviews on the "Collected Works of Gu Zhun", sources said.
The Propaganda Department of the ruling Communist Party had ordered a gag on all debate on the thoughts of Gu, an independent thinker who angered Beijing before his death during the Cultural Revolution.
Gu openly opposed totalitarianism and supported the rule of law and civil rights.
The fifth edition of the magazine was published in September under the watchful eyes of censors, the sources said.
"We will still be able to publish the sixth edition. After that we don't know," a magazine editor, who asked not to be named, said in an interview.
"They did not say what exactly the problem was with the magazine," said the editor who suggested that politics could be the cause.
The axe has fallen on other publications, authors and filmmakers.
In August, the Press and Publications Administration suspended publication of the Economic Work Monthly, based in the southwestern province of Guizhou.
The suspension followed the magazine's publication of an article critical of a privately circulated tract known as the "10,000-word essay" that urges a return to class struggle and warns of the erosion of the state sector by private enterprise.
In September, Cui Enqing was sacked as president of the Beijing Youth Daily after the Chinese capital's most outspoken newspaper reported a poisoning case that caused a plunge in sales of a state-owned beverage manufacturer.
Propaganda tsars also have banned all of the novels and two films of controversial writer Wang Shuo.
The campaign to enforce ideological orthodoxy has left Chinese filmmakers at a loss as to what kind of movies would receive the blessings of propaganda tsars. The number of movies made this year has fallen sharply compared with previous years.
China's former first lady Wang Guangmei auctioned her private antique collection on Tuesday and said she would use proceeds to help impoverished mothers.
Wang's collection, consisting of porcelain bowls and plates and a brush holder made of ivory dating back to the Qing (1644-1911) and Song (960-1279) dynasties, fetched 566,000 yuan ($68,000) at an auction at a Beijing hotel.
"My mother gave them to me ... They are priceless to me," Wang told Reuters.
She is the widow of former president Liu Shaoqi who died in prison during the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
The Sungari auction house had put the value of the antiques, some of which were Wang's dowry from her wealthy capitalist father, at up to 510,000 yuan ($61,000).
The collection was seized from Wang and eluded destruction by radical Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution. The authorities returned some of her collection when she was released from prison 11 years later.
"They were at Zhongnanhai or they would have all been smashed during the Cultural Revolution," Wang said. The Zhongnanhai compound in central Beijing still serves as home and office to many of China's leaders.
Liu, China's former president, was deposed during the Cultural Revolution and died in prison in 1969. He was rehabilitated posthumously in 1980.
Wang said she had deep emotional ties to the collection but these were outweighed by concerns for those living in poverty.
"I would be reluctant to part with what my mother left me without a reason ... (but) my heart aches even more when I see impoverished mothers," the former first lady said.
"It shouldn't be like this. The country led by our Communist Party cannot let families be this destitute," she said.
China has about 65 million people still struggling to get by with incomes under the official absolute poverty line of 530 yuan ($64) a year, officials say.
In September, Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin vowed to "gnaw the hard bone" of poverty by pouring funds into the drive to raise living standards for the poorest segment of the nation by the turn of the century.
The communists, who swept to power in 1949 on public resentment against widespread poverty and corruption, fear the widening gap between rich and poor today could spark social unrest and undermine its grip on power.
China says it reduced the number of people living in abject poverty by five million in 1995.
About 3,500 destitute mothers in western and southwestern China were expected to benefit from Tuesday's auction.
Proceeds would go to an anti-poverty fund headed by the former first lady to lend money to impoverished mothers to help them get started in farming, raise livestock or make handicrafts to earn a living in future, Wang said.
The fund would also provide education and give medical treatment to destitute mothers, she said.
Taiwanese business leader Kao Ching-yuan on Wednesday urged Beijing to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded relations.
"If the relations between the two sides are kept at a low ebb due to political and ideological problems... Taiwanese businessmen will lose confidence because of higher risks," said Kao, vice-chairman of President Enterprises, Taiwan's biggest investor in China.
Chinese Vice-Premier Li Lanqing earlier told the same seminar in Beijing no one could stand in the way of direct trade and transport links between China and Taiwan which have been banned by the island since 1949.
Kao is heading a delegation of nearly 80 prominent Taiwanese business leaders and politicians who arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for a high-profile visit. Taiwanese economic officials are visiting in a private capacity.
Kao called for the resumption of talks suspended last year after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark trip to the United States. Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation.
"I would like to suggest here... that the two sides resume as soon as possible talks on trade and investment," Kao said.
Taiwanese newspapers said Kao would meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin and other senior officials during the current trip, which comes less than two weeks after President Lee called for a review of economic policy toward China with the aim of avoiding overdependence on the mainland.
Taipei's China Times Express newspaper said on Sunday that Taiwan's economic planners had drawn up measures -- including contingency plans to restrict Taiwanese investment on the mainland -- if Taiwan-China relations deteriorated.
Li, the Chinese vice-premier, took a swipe at President Lee, saying no one could block direct trade and transport links between China and Taiwan, rivals from the time of the Chinese civil war that ended in 1949.
"Economic development between the two sides is the general trend and no single person can obstruct this," Li said.
"Any person who tries to place artificial barriers to restrict economic cooperation is going against the will of the people of the two sides," he said.
He also told the seminar he hoped Taiwan authorities would allow direct links as soon as possible.
Indirect links between the two sides have been allowed since the late 1980s, through Hong Kong or a third country.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport links. But Taiwan has been reluctant to lift the ban, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
China has been pressing Taiwan to open direct links. Last week, China introduced a series of regulations to pave the way for direct shipping links.
The Taiwanese delegation is the largest to visit China since a trend of easing tensions was reversed by Taiwan President Lee's mid-1995 visit to the United States.
China's exports climbed again in October as slow demand at home encouraged companies to ship abroad and the government expanded credit to exporters, newspapers and a government economist said Wednesday.
The upturn was expected to continue through the first half of 1997, said Wang Jian, a researcher with the cabinet's State Planning Commission.
Exports rose for the fourth consecutive month in October, jumping 23.3 percent to $15.22 billion from a year ago, said the International Business Daily, a newspaper published by the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
The performance helped the nation register its biggest monthly trade surplus of the year. The surplus stood at $3.9 billion in October compared with $3.2 billion in September, the newspaper said.
"This kind of rebound in exports ... is estimated to last until the first half of next year," Wang said in a telephone interview. Wang said slow domestic demand has forced manufacturers to look to overseas markets.
Also, domestic enterprises had adjusted to a cut in government-paid export tax rebates, he said. The government slashed the rebate on exports of industrial products to 9.0 percent from 14.0 percent on January 1, 1996.
The International Business Daily said exports rebounded because the government sped up the payment of export tax rebates and expanded credit to exporters.
Exports slumped in the first six months of 1996, dented by rising wages and the relative strength of the currency.
A slowdown in government payments of tax rebates to exporters had also discouraged many firms from exporting their goods earlier in the year. Many of those firms focused sales on the domestic market instead.
However, the government has been stepping up payment of export rebates to try to revive exports.
Imports inched up 3 percent to $11.31 billion in October from October 1995, the Business Daily said.
The import data showed that the impact of this year's tariff cuts has gradually weakened, it said.
In the first 10 months of this year, China's exports totalled $119.22 billion, mostly unchanged from the same 1995 period, the newspaper said. But imports added up to $107.21 billion, a rise of 5.5 percent from the year-ago period.
Japan, the United States and Europe remained China's largest export markets.
China's exports to Japan rose a year-on-year 8.6 percent to $24.5 billion in the first 10 months of this year, the daily said. Exports to the United States and Europe increased 5.5 percent and 4.5 percent to $21.3 billion and $18.9 billion respectively.
China has vowed to curb the influence of Buddhism in Tibet, saying religion would have to bow to socialism.
Monks outnumbered students and more money was spent on monasteries than on Communist Party buildings in the Himalayan region, the official Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Wednesday.
"In the basic interest of the Tibetan people, further development of temples, monks and nuns cannot be without restrictions," the newspaper said.
"Satisfying the basic needs of believers will do."
There were 1,787 temples in the restive region by early 1996, with 46,000 monks and nuns -- exceeding the number of high school students in the region, the newspaper said. It gave no comparative figures.
China has shut many temples in Tibet in recent years to uproot the influence of the region's spiritual god-king, the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule.
Socialism must take precedence over religion, the newspaper said.
"Religion must adapt to the development needs of socialism and not socialism adapting to the needs of religion. We must remain clear-headed on this principle," it said.
The Dalai Lama won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland, but Beijing views international support for Tibet's holiest man as a Western plot to return the region to feudal rule and split China.
Beijing says the Dalai Lama is a political activist and not a purely religious figure.
"International anti-Chinese forces use the Tibet issue to contain China's development and (the Tibet issue) is an important means to 'Westernise' and 'divide' China," the newspaper said.
"Some temples are directly or indirectly controlled by the Dalai Lama clique and become the headquarters and venue of separatist forces at home and abroad," the newspaper said.
"Since 1987, elements creating disturbances and sabotaging stability have been mainly law-breaking monks and nuns."
Tibet has been rocked by repeated anti-Chinese protests that Beijing charges are stirred up by supporters of the Dalai Lama.
The newspaper also complained that monks did not contribute to economic growth.
"It goes without saying that such a large number of strong young people relying on alms from the masses and not engaging in productive work has a negative effect on social and economic development," the newspaper said.
"Money spent on renovating temples is more than money spent on building or repairing Communist Party and government buildings," it said.
Beijing, eager not to antagonise all of the Buddhist clergy, has pumped 53 million yuan ($6.4 million) into its five-year renovation of the sprawling Potala Palace, winter home of the Dalai Lamas for centuries.
China's exports climbed again in October due to sluggish domestic demand, faster payment of export tax rebates and an expansion of credit to exporters, newspapers and a government economist said on Wednesday.
The upturn in exports was expected to continue through the first half of 1997, said Wang Jian, a researcher with the cabinet's State Planning Commission.
Exports rose for the fourth consecutive month in October, jumping 23.3 percent to $15.22 billion from a year ago, said the International Business Daily, a newspaper published by the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
The healthy exports performance helped the nation register its biggest monthly trade surplus of the year. The surplus stood at $3.91 billion in October compared with $3.2 billion in September, the newspaper said.
"This kind of rebound in exports ... is estimated to last until the first half of next year," Wang told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Wang attributed the upturn to slow domestic demand, forcing manufacturers to look to overseas markets.
Also, domestic enterprises had adjusted to a cut in government-paid export tax rebates, he said. The government slashed the rebate on exports of industrial products to 9.0 percent from 14.0 percent on January 1, 1996.
The International Business Daily said exports rebounded because the government sped up the payment of export tax rebates and expanded credit to exporters.
Exports slumped in the first six months of 1996, dented by rising wages and the relative strength of the currency, the renminbi.
A slowdown in government payments of tax rebates to exporters had also discouraged many firms from exporting their goods earlier in the year. Many of those firms focused sales on the domestic market instead.
However, the government has been stepping up payment of export rebates to try to revive exports.
Imports inched up a year-on-year three percent to $11.31 billion in October, the Business Daily said.
The import data showed that the impact of this year's tariff cuts has gradually weakened, it said.
In the first 10 months of this year, China's exports totalled $119.22 billion, mostly unchanged from the same 1995 period, the newspaper said. But imports added up to $107.21 billion, a rise of 5.5 percent from the year-ago period.
The latest figures brought the total trade surplus for the January-to-October period to $12.01 billion, it said.
Japan, the United States and Europe remained China's largest export markets.
China's exports to Japan rose a year-on-year 8.6 percent to $24.5 billion in the first 10 months of this year, the daily said. Exports to the United States and Europe increased 5.5 percent and 4.5 percent to $21.3 billion and $18.9 billion respectively.
Machinery and electronic exports totalled $38 billion in the first 10 months, accounting for one-third of total exports and up 11 percent from the year-ago period, the newspaper said.
Exports of toys, furniture, shoes, crude oil and plastic products increased in the first 10 months. But exports of textile yarn and related products, garment, steel and aquatic products all fell, it said.
Imports by foreign-funded enterprises in the first 10 months soared a year-on-year 23 percent to $105.0 billion.
Car imports plunged 39 percent year-on-year between January and October, the newspaper said. It did not elaborate.
China announced on Thursday that a court had rejected the appeal by a son of one of the country's politically powerful families, upholding a suspended death sentence for bribery.
The court showed leniency to Zhou Beifang, 43, former chairman of Hong Kong-listed affiliates of the giant state-owned Capital Iron and Steel Corp (Shougang), because he showed remorse, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Zhou's death sentence was suspended for two years. Such suspensions usually mean the sentence will not be carried out if the prisoner repents and cooperates with authorities.
Zhou is one of China's so-called "princelings", or children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence due to their top level connections.
The Zhou family has close ties to the family of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
The court also showed leniency because Zhou voluntarily returned ill-gotten wealth even before prosecutors obtained evidence against him, Xinhua said.
Zhou was convicted of accepting bribes totalling 9.28 million Hong Kong dollars ($1.2 million) between June 1993 and April 1994, Xinhua said. It gave no details of who paid Zhou the bribes or why.
He was also found guilty of paying 1.2 million yuan ($144,600) in bribes to three people, including two former officials of the Beijing city government, so that his wife and daughter could move to the British colony, it said.
Xinhua quoted the Supreme Court as announcing the decision though it was the appeals court that handed down the verdict.
The agency gave no explanation. It did not say when Zhou was convicted, when he appealed or why his appeal was turned down.
Court officials reached by telephone declined comment.
State television showed a grim Zhou wearing a stylish, striped blue shirt and examining documents held by a court policeman as a court tribunal looked on.
Zhou's conviction was part of a highly-publicised anti-graft campaign launched by China last year. It led to the suicide of a Beijing vice-mayor in April 1995 and the fall of his mentor, former Beijing Communist Party boss Chen Xitong.
Zhou's father, Zhou Guanwu, 78, resigned as chairman and Communist Party secretary of Shougang in February 1995, citing old age. He stepped down days after his son's detention.
The court also rejected the appeal of co-defendant Chen Jian, 39, former deputy director of the General Office of the Communist Party's Beijing Municipal Committee. It upheld his 15-year prison sentence for accepting bribes from Zhou, Xinhua said.
Another former official of the Beijing city government, Li Min, did not appeal against his sentence of life imprisonment, also for accepting bribes from Zhou, the agency said.
In a related case, the court rejected the appeal of businessman He Shiping, who was sentenced to 16 years for accepting bribes. A fifth defendant, who was given five years in prison, did not appeal, it said.
Television showed lengthy footage that include Li staring at the floor and a dejected He Shiping wiping tears from his eyes.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949. But it has staged a comeback since economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago as living standards climb but at the cost of eroding party discipline.
China will defrock radical monks in Tibet in a crackdown that could last up to five years in a bid to uproot the influence of the Dalai Lama in his Himalayan homeland, a Chinese propaganda official said on Thursday.
"Lamas who are comparatively reactionary will be told to return to secular life," the propaganda official said by telephone from Tibet's capital, Lhasa.
"Reorganisation of monasteries... will consist mainly of ideological education... It could continue for three to five years," said the official, who declined to identify himself.
China has vowed to curb the influence of Buddhism and the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled god-king, in the region, saying religion must conform to socialism instead of the other way round.
Atheist China views religion as feudal superstition though it tolerates a limited degree of religious freedom.
"Religious culture... not only hampers social development and economic development, but also stops people becoming more civilised," the official Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Thursday.
The newspaper complained last week that monks in Tibet outnumbered students and more money was spent on monasteries than on Communist Party buildings.
"Monasteries will not be closed... (but) work teams will enter and be stationed at monasteries," the propaganda official said.
For several months, China has been stationing "work teams" in Tibetan monasteries. The teams force monks into study sessions on becoming more "patriotic" and into signing pledges supporting Chinese authorities.
"Those aspects of religion which fail to adapt to social development and impede social progress will be eliminated... to prevent the Dalai Lama from using religion to engage in splittist activities," the official said.
There were 1,787 temples in Tibet by early 1996, with 46,000 monks and nuns -- exceeding the number of high school students in the region, the Tibet Daily has said.
The newspaper has complained that healthy young Tibetans were entering the clergy and living off alms instead of working.
China has shut many temples in Tibet in recent years to try to eradicate the influence of the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule.
The Dalai Lama won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland, but Beijing views international support for Tibet's holiest man as a Western plot to split China and contain its development.
Beijing says the Dalai Lama is a political activist and not a purely religious figure.
"The spiritual realm is the main battlefield of our struggle against the Dalai Lama clique," the Tibet Daily said.
The newspaper said last week some temples in Tibet were controlled by supporters of the Dalai Lama and had become the headquarters and venue of separatist forces at home and abroad to engage in separatist activities.
It blamed monks and nuns for creating disturbances and sabotaging stability since 1987. Tibet has been rocked by repeated anti-Chinese protests that Beijing charges are stirred up by the Dalai Lama's supporters.
A Chinese court on Friday will consider the appeal of dissident Wang Dan against his 11-year sentence for plotting to overthrow the government, a hearing held days before a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
The Beijing Higher People's Court was widely expected to reject the 27-year-old dissident's appeal and uphold his conviction, Chinese lawyers said. In China, appellate courts rarely overturn rulings by lower courts.
Asked what the chances were of an acquittal, Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, told Reuters on Thursday: "I feel there's practically none. There is no precedent."
Wang's appeal comes four days before the scheduled arrival of the U.S. secretary of state, who diplomats say was expected to raise human rights issues in his meetings with Chinese leaders during his November 19-21 visit.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained over the last year by a range of issues from human rights to Taiwan to arms proliferation and trade.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a briefing on Thursday that Wang's trial had no bearing on Sino-U.S. relations because it involved a Chinese citizen and not an American.
Beijing has slammed Western criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Christopher would not be not alone in bringing up Beijing's shortcomings in human rights.
Former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher said on Thursday that harsh sentences slapped on Wang and Wei Jingsheng, widely known as the father of China's modern democracy movement, had caused dismay in the international community.
"The recent harsh sentences imposed on Mr Wei and Mr Wang have caused dismay in the wider world," Thatcher told a business conference in Beijing.
Last week, Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson said he had expressed his misgivings over the jailing of Wang to his Chinese counterpart, Li Peng.
Wang's mother said court officials had told her that she would be able to attend her son's hearing as one of two defence lawyers, but she would not be allowed to speak. She has submitted a written defence.
The dissident's father and older sister would also be allowed to sit in on the hearing at the appellate court in Beijing, the mother said.
"If we don't go, Wang Dan would feel even more isolated. Our going is spiritual encouragement for him," the mother said.
The dissident's lawyer is unlikely to attend because only Wang would be allowed to speak.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling pro-democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
The lower court took less than four hours to convict and sentence Wang on October 30.
Wang had already served four years in prison for his role as a leader of student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the military with heavy loss of life in 1989.
The New York-based Human Rights in China has denounced what it said was the "secret trial" of Wang on a trumped up charge.
China said it was an open and fair trial but Human Rights in China said no foreign reporters, diplomats or other international observers were allowed to attend.
There has been no mention of Wang's conviction in the local Chinese-language media.
China's Supreme Court announced on Thursday that a court has rejected the appeal of a son of one of the country's political elite, upholding a suspended death sentence for bribery.
The appellate court showed leniency because Zhou Beifang, 43, former chairman of Hong Kong-listed affiliates of the giant state-owned Capital Iron and Steel Corp (Shougang), showed remorse, the Xinhua news agency said, quoting the Supreme Court.
Chinese courts frequently impose the death penalty in corruption cases but as Zhou's death sentence was suspended for two years it could be commuted to life imprisonment by the time it was due to be carried out, as is often the case in China.
Zhou is one of China's so-called "princelings", the popular sobriquet applied to the children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence.
The Zhou family has close ties to the family of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
The appellate court also showed leniency because Zhou voluntarily returned ill-gotten wealth during the investigation even before prosecutors obtained evidence against him, Xinhua said.
Zhou was convicted of accepting bribes totalling 9.28 million Hong Kong dollars ($1.2 million) between June 1993 and April 1994, Xinhua said. It gave no details of who paid Zhou the bribes or why.
He was also found guilty of paying 1.2 million yuan ($144,600) in bribes to three people, including two former officials of the Beijing city government, so that his wife and daughter could move to the British colony, it said.
Xinhua did not say when Zhou appealed, when he was first convicted or why the Beijing Higher People's Court rejected his appeal.
Court officials reached by telephone declined to comment.
Zhou's conviction was part of a highly-publicised anti-graft campaign launched by China last year.
The drive led to the suicide of a Beijing vice-mayor in April 1995 and the fall of his mentor, former Beijing Communist Party boss Chen Xitong.
Zhou's father, Zhou Guanwu, 78, resigned as chairman and Communist Party secretary of Shougang in February 1995, citing old age following Zhou Beifang's detention.
Shougang has been restructured since Zhou Guanwu's downfall.
The appellate court also rejected the appeal of co-defendant Chen Jian, 39, a former senior official of the Beijing city government, and upheld his 15-year prison sentence for accepting bribes from Zhou, Xinhua said.
Another former official of the Beijing city government, Li Min, did not appeal against his sentence of life imprisonment also for accepting bribes from Zhou, the agency said.
The appeal of a fourth defendant who was sentenced to 16 years was rejected while a fifth defendant who was given five years in prison did not appeal, it said.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
A Chinese court on Friday took 10 minutes to reject the appeal of dissident Wang Dan and uphold an 11-year prison sentence for subversion, his mother said.
The verdict came four days before the scheduled arrival of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who diplomats say was expected to raise human rights issues in his meetings with Chinese leaders during his visit.
Angry family members staged a one-hour sit-down protest in front of the Beijing Higher People's Court after the court rejected Wang's appeal against his conviction, she said.
"It (the verdict) was all prepared in advance," Wang Lingyun told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"I'm very angry. It was very unfair," she said. "The (appeals) court just copied the verdict of the first trial."
The 27-year-old dissident was not allowed to speak at his appeal hearing as a judge read from a brief, prepared statement, the mother said.
Wang was convicted of plotting to subvert the government by publishing articles in foreign publications and receiving funds from hostile overseas organisations.
The mother said she would petition the appeals court but that it would be a formality and would not involve the court holding another trial.
Court officials, reached by telephone, declined comment. The tightly-controlled state media made no mention of Wang's conviction.
Police earlier kept reporters away from the court building, the family's home and nearby subway stations.
The dissident, wearing a red sweater and grey suit, appeared in low spirits and poor health, the mother said.
"(But) he was psychologically prepared. It came as no surprise. He does not have any illusions about them (the authorities)," she said.
The former student leader had already served four years in prison for his role in student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the army in 1989.
The U.S. secretary of state, scheduled to arrive on Tuesday, was likely to bring up human rights when he meets Chinese leaders.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained over the last year by issues ranging from human rights to Taiwan to arms proliferation and trade.
Beijing has slammed Western criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher said in Beijing on Thursday that the world was dismayed by harsh sentences slapped on Wang and fellow dissident Wei Jingsheng, the father of China's modern democracy movement.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
China has said Wang's trial last month by a lower court was open and fair but the New York-based Human Rights in China said no foreign reporters, diplomats or other international observers were allowed to attend.
Human Rights in China has denounced the trial as a "secret trial" on a trumped up charge. The lower court took less than four hours to convict and sentence Wang on October 30.
American movies, hamburgers, jeans -- and U.S. bashing -- are all the rage in China today.
China and the United States have gone from confrontation in the 1950s and 1960s to odd bedfellows in the 1970s and 1980s to a love-hate relationship in the 1990s.
"More and more ordinary Chinese people are disgusted with the deeds of the United States," said Tang Zhenyu, one of five authors of "China Can Say No", a controversial bestseller which is capitalising on anti-U.S. sentiment.
For Tang, the fondness he once had for the United States ended in March when Washington sent aircraft carrier battle groups to waters near Taiwan where China was conducting war games and missile tests to cow the island into abandoning any dreams of independence.
"I believe this was the turning point for most ordinary Chinese people," Tang said in a recent interview.
Washington sent the warships in a show of force to support Taipei, Beijing's rival since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, as Taiwan held historic direct presidential elections.
For some Chinese, their American dream turned into a nightmare when Beijing lost its bid to host the 2000 Olympics in 1993. Many blamed Uncle Sam.
Anti-U.S. sentiment mounted after Chinese state media played up what was described as unfair and discriminatory treatment meted out to Chinese Olympians at the Atlanta Games.
"In the past, the United States had the wrong impression that the Chinese government was anti-U.S. while the people were pro-U.S.," said Wang Jisi, director of the Institute of American Studies of the prestigious Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
"China Can Say No" touched a sympathetic chord with many Chinese fed up with the United States.
It has chapters entitled "Burn Hollywood" and "If necessary, create another Saddam" in a reference to Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein.
"China Can Say No" sold so well that its authors have put out a sequel. It has given rise to a flurry of anti-U.S. books, including "Why Does China Say No?"
Beijing and Washington have also wrangled over human rights, arms proliferation and trade. The two giants narrowly avoided a bruising trade war in 1995 and again this year over U.S. charges that China condoned copyright piracy.
Many Chinese welcomed the re-election of U.S. President Bill Clinton this month as the return of a devil they knew and are hoping for a new post-election approach from Washington.
"Now, a good opportunity has presented itself for improving and expanding Sino-U.S. relations," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai said of Clinton's re-election.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to visit China next week to help push that process along. China last week blasted U.S. penalties against textiles ahead of Christopher's visit, but said the two sides had more in common than differences.
The Sino-U.S. honeymoon began in the 1970s when China's bamboo curtain came down and the country opened up to the West, triggering an influx of U.S. pop culture.
McDonald's is now a household word to many Chinese children and China's youth have traded yesterday's navy blue Mao suits for today's jeans.
U.S. blockbusters, such as "True Lies" starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and Tom Hanks' "Forrest Gump", have taken China by storm, raking in millions.
Beijing's honeymoon with Washington ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Chinese military crackdown on a student-led drive for democracy in June 1989.
Sino-U.S. ties were dealt another jarring blow after the United States allowed a private visit by Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui in June 1995. Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into isolation.
Sino-U.S. ties have improved since the March war games but China still suspects Washington is trying to contain it.
"The United States does not wish for the rise of a strong country which does not listen to it and does not do things according to its rules," said Wang of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
A Tibetan nun has had her jail term doubled to 18 years for refusing to recognise Beijing's choice as the reincarnation of the region's second holiest monk, the Tibet Information Network (TIN) said on Monday.
The sentence of 19-year-old Ngawang Sangdrol, jailed since she was 15, was doubled in July, partly because she refused to accept Beijing's choice as the Panchen Lama, according to the London-based TIN, which monitors human rights in the Himalayan region.
"Ngawang...is now facing (more time) in jail than any other female political prisoner in Tibet," TIN said. She is due for release in the year 2010.
Officials reached by telephone in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa denied knowledge of the report.
The 10th Panchen Lama died in 1989, and Beijing has anointed a six-year-old boy as his reincarnation.
The Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, has named another six-year-old boy as the 11th Panchen Lama, and many Tibetans see the Beijing-backed child as a pretender.
Beijing's choice is in the Chinese capital under state protection against any possible assassination attempts by radical Tibetans, Chinese sources have said.
China denies there are political prisoners in Tibet and says foreign critics of its human rights record are interfering in its internal affairs.
Ngawang is already serving nine years -- three years for taking part in a pro-independence demonstration in 1992 and six years for singing nationalist songs in prison in 1993, according to TIN.
Her sentence was doubled in part because she refused to tidy her cell in Lhasa's Drapchi prison in March in apparent protest against a political re-education campaign, TIN said.
The campaign is designed to force prisoners to accept Beijing's choice as the reincarnated Panchen Lama.
Ngawang also refused to stand up in the presence of a Tibetan official, Brigade Commander Khandrol Jangpe, TIN said.
The human rights group, which had reported in August that Ngawang was on a restricted diet and confined in a cell with no windows, said it had only recently received confirmation of the longer jail term through a former prisoner who fled Tibet.
China has vowed to curb the influence of Buddhism and the Dalai Lama in Tibet, saying socialism must take precedence over religion.
The Dalai Lama, the most revered figure in Tibetan Buddhism, fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule. He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland.
State media have complained that monks and nuns outnumber high school students and that too much money was spent on the region's monasteries.
Chinese activists, in a statement on Tuesday hours ahead of a visit by the U.S. Secretary of State, protested against American backing for Japan's bid to become a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council.
"We hold that Japan is not qualified to become a permanent member of the Security Council of the United Nations," the activists said in a letter to U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who is due to arrive in Beijing later on Tuesday for a three-day visit.
The letter, signed by 15 activists, said they opposed Japan becoming a permanent member of the Security Council because many Japanese politicians had been reluctant to apologise for its war atrocities and had tried to whitewash history.
China says more than 35 million people were killed or wounded during Japan's invasion and occupation of most of China from the early 1930s to 1945.
"(We) strongly protest the U.S. government supporting Japan's (bid) to become a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council to draw Japan over to its side," said the letter, a copy of which was made available to Reuters.
Tong Zeng, a leader of the group, said he would forward the letter to Christopher through the U.S. embassy in Beijing.
The Chinese government, eager for more low-interest loans from Japan, has been reluctant to antagonise Tokyo and has not taken a public stance on the issue.
The United States has long supported giving Japan and Germany permanent seats on the Security Council.
The council currently consists of five permanent members that were the main victors in World War Two -- the United States, Russia, Britain, China and France -- and 10 non-permanent members who serve two-year terms.
Most Chinese have been slow to forgive Japan's war past.
"U.S. backing for Japan's (bid)...will undoubtedly encourage the resurrection of Japanese militarism and bring a new threat to the peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region," the letter said.
The anti-Japanese activists recounted what they said were U.S. mistakes, including not putting Emperor Hirohito on trial after the end of World War Two in 1945.
"After the end of the war, the United States harmed the feelings of the Chinese people several times...sheltering Japan's top war criminal Emperor Hirohito," the letter said. Hirohito died in 1989.
The activists also faulted the United States for "ignoring historical facts" and handing disputed islands in the East China Sea to Japan in 1971.
Sino-Japanese ties were strained this year over the islands, which Beijing calls the Diaoyus and Tokyo the Senkakus.
A Japanese right-wing group built a makeshift lighthouse on one of the islands in July, triggering anti-Japanese demonstrations in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Taiwan's Nationalist rulers, who lost the Chinese civil war to the Communists in 1949, also claim the islands. Activists in the British colony of Hong Kong, which reverts to Chinese rule in 1997, have opposed Japan's territorial claims.
Emotions were fanned in September when a Hong Kong activist drowned after he jumped into stormy waters around the islands to demonstrate support for Chinese claims.
Bankruptcies in China -- unheard of for almost four decades -- are expected to more than double in number this year as authorities try to shed hopelessly indebted firms.
The figure is expected to rise even further next year as officials become more determined not to subsidise loss-making state firms.
More than 5,200 Chinese companies were expected to go under in 1996, up from 2,200 in 1995 or more than the previous six years put together, Cao Siyuan, architect of China's bankruptcy law, said.
"Whether enterprises are psychologically prepared for it or not, the rate of bankruptcies gradually increasing is unavoidable," Cao said in a recent interview.
In the first half of this year, 1,692 enterprises declared bankruptcy, soaring by more than 107 percent compared with the year-ago period, said Cao, who now runs a consultancy to help enterprises seeking to merge or go bankrupt.
A total of 1,625 firms declared bankruptcy in 1994, up from 710 in 1993, 428 in 1992, 117 in 1991 and 32 in 1990.
China passed a breakthrough bankruptcy law in 1988 in the first flush of an ambitious campaign to force lumbering state-owned enterprises to sink or swim in the marketplace.
However, official fears of mass unemployment and social unrest if loss-making firms are allowed to go under has hampered implementation of the bitter medicine.
But China was expected to accelerate bankruptcies and mergers of state firms next year to reduce the burden on state coffers and slash subsidies to state enterprises.
There is little need for alarm for the ever-increasing number of bankruptcies because it is only a fraction of the total number of enterprises, said Cao.
"One can't say it's too big," Cao said of the number of insolvent enterprises. "Currently, the bankruptcy rate is less than 0.1 percent (of the total number of firms)... One percent is normal."
About one percent of China's estimated 100,000 state enterprises were hopelessly in debt and completely unattractive to investors looking for cheap companies to purchase or to merge with, Cao said.
In Huangshi city in the northern province of Hubei, about 80 percent of medium- and large-size state enterprises are losing money, the official People's Daily said.
China's state sector reported a historic net loss of 3.0 billion yuan ($361.4 million) in the first quarter, the first such deficit since the country embraced paramount leader Deng Xiaoping's economic reforms in 1979.
The government allocated 20 billion yuan this year to write off bad debts of state firms which go under, but this is hardly enough, the People's Daily said.
In Wuhu city in the central province of Anhui, 420 million yuan is needed to write off the bad debts of 35 state firms, but only 50 million yuan has been allocated, the newspaper said.
"Mergers and bankruptcies... are roads without detour," the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, said.
"(Enterprises) which should die should be allowed to die," the newspaper said. "Mergers and bankruptcies are a reform in which we have more to gain than lose."
But bankruptcies and mergers must guard against social unrest, debt evasion and theft of state assets, it said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
Two sons of Beijing's disgraced Communist Party boss, Chen Xitong, have been detained and face possible prosecution for economic crimes, Chinese sources said on Friday.
The fate of Chen himself was unknown. He was one of the most powerful men in China before his fall in April 1995 after one of his proteges, Beijing Vice-Mayor Wang Baosen, came under investigation for economic crimes and committed suicide.
"It all depends on the (party's) Central Commission for Discipline Inspection...(which) is investigating Chen Xitong," one source said in reference to whether the commission would hand Chen's case over to courts for prosecution.
Court officials, reached by telephone, declined to comment.
"This is a test of whether the government's anti-corruption drive is for real," the source said told Reuters. Critics say the campaign targets only petty officials.
Two sources with ties to the party said Chen's eldest son, Chen Xiaoxi, and younger son, Chen Xiaotong, were being held at the Qincheng Prison in a northern suburb of Beijing and faced possible prosecution.
The younger son has been in custody since last year but it was unclear when the older son was detained.
The sources said they were uncertain over precisely what charges might be filed against either of the two.
Prison guards were transferred to Beijing from other provinces to ensure the two men remained under tight security. Beijing was the political powerbase of the family.
Outlook magazine, published by the official Xinhua news agency, said this month that Chen Xitong's case "will not just fade away".
Chen Xitong, 66, has not been seen in public since April 1995 when he resigned as Beijing's Communist Party boss. He was ousted from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, becoming the most senior victim of a crackdown on corruption.
Chen, who was promoted to the Politburo in recognition of his hardline stand against student-led demonstrations for democracy in Beijing in 1989, is believed to be under virtual house arrest. He is officially said to be under investigation for "serious mistakes".
Unpublished party documents have said Chen, who ran Beijing for 12 years, first as mayor and then as party boss, had abused his office by amassing $24 million in unauthorised funds and lavishing favours on friends, associates and a mistress.
Chen gave nine flats around Beijing to his mistress and her relatives, according to the documents.
In December 1995, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa shed light on Chen's whereabouts. Zhang said: "His life is better than mine... He plays table tennis...eats what he wants."
A second source quoted official documents as saying the younger son illegally channelled government funds to his father's mistress, He Ping.
The younger son, a former executive of a Sino-Japanese joint venture hotel in Beijing, also tipped off his father's mistress about the vice-mayor's suicide and told her to go to Hong Kong and not come back, the source said.
The brothers are among China's so-called "princelings", or children of the ruling party elite who enjoy wide influence due to their top level connections.
Corruption was virtually eliminated after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
China's breakaway Catholic Church has ordained about 50 graduates of one of the country's biggest seminaries into the priesthood this year, clergy at the seminary said on Monday.
The new priests, five of whom were ordained on Sunday, were the first group of clergymen installed by the National Catholic Seminary since 1991, they said.
The officially authorised seminary in Beijing did not accept any new students for six years from 1986 due to a lack of funds and space, the clergymen said.
"It's a big problem. Funds are too limited," a priest surnamed Meng told Reuters by telephone.
The seminary receives 10,000 yuan ($1,200) a year from the government, or one-sixth of its annual budget, another priest said. It raises the rest from donations.
Father Meng, who graduated in 1991, said there was no shortage of youths, many of them poor, who wanted to become priests.
He and other priests denied that government pressure had played a role in the lack of new students between 1986 and 1991.
Catholics in communist China are allowed to worship openly only if they belong to the state-sponsored Catholic Patriotic Association.
The association, which supervises the national seminary, appoints its own bishops and does not recognise the Pope as universal Catholic leader.
The official church has the blessings of the Communist Party but it too must walk a fine line between the demands of the party elite and the needs of the faithful.
The Washington-based Human Rights Watch/Asia has said Beijing has been stepping up harassment of unauthorised Catholic and Protestant groups in recent years.
The group said the crackdown on Christians included stricter controls on contacts with foreigners and was part of a broader drive begun in 1994 against all forms of religion as well as political dissent.
Bishop Zong Huaide of the state-backed church ordained five graduates of the seminary on Sunday. Zong delivered mass at the Church of the Holy Saviour, built in 1703, which was packed with about 3,000 people.
China has 31 seminaries and about 1,100 priests, 700 of whom are state-anointed young men.
The official Catholic Church in China counts four million members, while the underground church is believed to have several million members.
Vatican relations with Beijing have alternately cooled and warmed over the decades since the late 1950s, when links were severed over the Vatican's recognition of Taiwan.
China has said it will not normalise relations until the Vatican severs its ties with Taiwan, which Beijing has regarded as a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
The Vatican, on the other hand, has demanded recognition of the Pope's primacy before it renews ties with China.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin tried to reassure Taiwanese businessmen on Thursday, saying Beijing would not allow political differences to stand in the way of trade and investment.
"We maintain that political differences should not be allowed to affect and interfere with economic cooperation between the two sides," state radio quoted Jiang as telling visiting Taiwanese business leaders.
The economies of China and Taiwan were complementary, Jiang said, adding that the two sides should strengthen economic cooperation to benefit the entire Chinese race.
"We will continue to carry out our long-time policy of encouraging Taiwanese businessmen to invest," Jiang was quoted as saying. "No matter what the circumstances, we will protect all legitimate rights of Taiwanese investors."
A delegation of nearly 80 Taiwanese business leaders and politicians arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for a high-profile visit. Taiwanese economic officials are part of the delegation in a private capacity.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links with China since 1949 when the nation's Nationalist rulers fled to the island after their defeat by the communists.
Indirect trade and investment has been allowed since the late 1980s, usually through Hong Kong.
Jiang said China has always sought to speed up the establishment of direct trade and transport links with Taiwan.
Beijing has stepped up pressure on the island to lift the ban. Last week it unilaterally announced a set of regulations to pave the way for direct links.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport, but Taiwan has been reluctant to remove the curbs, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
Kao Ching-yuan, head of the delegation, urged Beijing on Wednesday to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded ties.
The talks were suspended last year after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark trip to the United States. Beijing views the island as a rebel province and insists it is not entitled to official links with other states.
Kao, vice-chairman of President Enterprises, a major Taiwanese conglomerate, was quoted by state television as saying the Chinese market had great potential and many Taiwanese businessmen were pushing for expanded economic cooperation.
President Enterprises is Taiwan's biggest investor in China.
Kao's visit came less than two weeks after Taiwan's President Lee called for a review of economic policy toward China with the aim of avoiding overdependence on the mainland.
The Taiwanese delegation was the largest to visit China since a trend of easing tensions was reversed by Lee's mid-1995 U.S. visit.
The seven-year-old boy chosen by China as Tibet's second holiest monk attended a ritual in Beijing last week to celebrate the first anniversary of his enthronement, major Chinese newspapers said on Wednesday.
Monks pounded drums, rang bells and chanted Buddhist scriptures as Beijing's choice as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama visited the Yonghe Lamasery -- the Temple of Harmony and Peace, on November 22, the newspapers said, quoting a report by the official Xinhua news agency.
Xinhua gave no reason for the delay in reporting the celebrations which were held a week before the actual anniversary on November 29.
Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, has named another boy as the reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama, the Himalayan region's second holiest monk who died in 1989.
Many Tibetans see the Chinese-sanctioned child, Gyantsen Norpo, as a pretender.
State media has given Beijing's choice much publicity in an apparent bid to convince Tibetans that he is the real reincarnation.
Major Chinese newspapers on Wednesday ran a picture of the child wearing traditional robes and a cap and surrounded by monks as he toured the Yonghe Lamasery which was built in 1694.
The boy blessed believers and preached from the seat reserved for the 10th Panchen Lama before his death.
Chinese sources have said Beijing's choice currently lives in the Chinese capital under state protection against any possible assassination attempts by radical Tibetans.
Western human rights groups have accused Beijing of detaining the boy recognised by the Dalai Lama and persecuting monks and nuns who refused to accept Beijing's choice.
The London-based human rights watchdog Tibet Information Network said last week a 19-year-old Tibetan nun had her jail term doubled to 18 years for refusing to recognise Beijing's choice.
China denies the accusations, saying the Dalai Lama's choice is "leading a free life, just like other Tibetan children".
But Beijing has refused to reveal the whereabouts of the Dalai Lama's choice or allow diplomats or foreign reporters to meet the boy.
China has lashed out at the exiled Tibetan leader, quoting the boy it anointed as the Panchen Lama as saying the Dalai Lama was the cause of turmoil in the region.
The Dalai Lama fled his homeland along with thousands of followers in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule. He heads a government-in-exile, which is not recognised by any country, in the Indian town of Dharamsala.
The Dalai Lama won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland, but Beijing views international support for Tibet's holiest man as a Western plot to split China and contain its development.
China on Thursday savoured its latest victory in a diplomatic tug-of-war with Taiwan, while the stunned island scrambled to limit the damage from South Africa's decision to abandon it.
South African President Nelson Mandela said in Johannesburg on Wednesday that Pretoria would switch diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing by the end of 1997.
Beijing hailed the move, saying it was in South Africa's interest.
"We ...welcome President Mandela's positive statement concerning normalisation of relations between China and South Africa," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing in Beijing.
"If South Africa can recognise reality at an earlier date it is in its own interest to do so," Cui said.
Beijing and Taipei have been diplomatic rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation. Taiwan insists its 21 million people should have a voice in international affairs.
South Africa is the biggest of just 30 states that recognise Taiwan's exiled Republic of China rather than the communist People's Republic on the mainland.
The Chinese government spokesman said the People's Republic was the sole, legitimate government of all China.
"South Africa must recognise there is only one China, recognise that Taiwan is a part of China and sever so-called diplomatic relations with Taiwan," Cui said.
Wealthy but diplomatically isolated Taiwan was stunned by Mandela's announcement and scrambled to limit the damage by urging its 29 other allies not to be swayed by China.
"We hope such a situation won't affect our diplomatic relations with other countries...," Taiwan's Foreign Minister John Chang said in a televised news conference in Taipei.
"We will actively negotiate with South Africa in the next 12 months," Chang said, adding that he might visit South Africa before an official visit scheduled for January.
South Africa's Ambassador to Taiwan Johannes Viljoen urged the island not to exact reprisals against Pretoria.
But Taiwan's top economic planner said the island would not continue to encourage investment in South Africa.
Tuntex, one of the island's major business groups, said earlier on Thursday it would respect the government's wishes in deciding whether to move ahead with a planned $3 billion petrochemical project in South Africa.
Taiwan officials said they would conduct an overall review of Taiwanese investments in South Africa, currently totalling over $1.5 billion.
South Africa's decision to switch ties to China sent Taiwan stocks into a brief dive, but the market had recovered by the close. Many businesssmen played down any potential for serious, long-term harm.
The Taiwan dollar closed little changed against its U.S. counterpart despite news of the island's diplomatic setback.
Taiwanese officials blamed China for South Africa's decision to ditch Taiwan, saying China was "buying" foreign ties and damaging chances for reunification between the longtime rivals.
There were no protests at Pretoria's embassy in Taipei, contrasting with the public outrage displayed in previous years after Washington, Seoul and other former allies dropped Taipei for Beijing.
China has retired its navy and air force commanders due to old age, a source familiar with the reshuffle said on Tuesday.
Admiral Zhang Lianzhong and Lieutenant General Yu Zhenwu, both 65, have stepped down as navy and air force commanders respectively, said the source who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Zhang was replaced by navy deputy commander Rear Admiral Shi Yunsheng, 56, the source said. Yu was succeeded by air force deputy commander Liu Shunyao, believed to be in his early 50s.
Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin approved the reshuffle in October in his capacity as chairman of the party's Central Military Commission, or commander-in-chief of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), the source said.
Asked if the reshuffle was intended to further consolidate Jiang's power in the military, the source said Zhang and Yu retired due to old age.
"It's professionalisation of the military," the source said.
However, a Chinese analyst said the four vice-chairmen of the Central Military Commission were already aged between 67 and 82 and still active. The two youngest vice-chairmen were appointed by Jiang.
Both the new appointees are believed to be proteges of Jiang, another analyst said. Jiang ordered the promotions of Shi and Yu to navy and air force deputy commanders in January, 1995 and December, 1994 respectively, the analyst said.
Some diplomats and Chinese analysts have dismissed Jiang as a transitional figure lacking the personal clout, political power base and administrative ability to step into the shoes of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping after the death of the 92-year-old patriarch.
But Jiang, who has no military pedigree, has moved in recent years to shore up his position in the military with a string of reshuffles.
The PLA is the world's largest armed force with three million members.
It is believed to be planning to pare that number by 500,000 in a streamlining that reflects the end of the Cold War and a desire to redirect state funds to economic development.
A Chinese court has rejected the appeal of veteran dissident Liu Nianchun against a labour camp term for writing petitions, saying freedom of speech must not endanger the security of the state.
Beijing's Chaoyang District Court rejected Liu's lawsuit on Monday on the grounds that a petition he initiated in 1995 "contained attacks against the people's government", said a copy of the verdict seen by Reuters on Tuesday.
The petition "exceeded the limits of the constitution and the law", the verdict said.
Liu had argued in his appeal that the constitution guaranteed his right to freedom of speech.
The court rejected Liu's argument, saying freedom of speech "must not endanger the security, honour and interests of the state", the verdict said.
Liu's wife, Chu Hailan, said she would appeal even though chances of victory were slim. She has 15 days in which to file an appeal.
"I will definitely appeal. This is our right," Chu said by telephone on Tuesday. She attacked the court ruling as "unfair... not objective and unjust".
Chu said that during the visit of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher to China last month police had shunted her to a labour camp in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang where her husband is held to prevent her meeting U.S. officials.
"It's a very desolate place. Life's awfully hard there," she said. "Liu Nianchun... eats only two meals a day."
She said her husband was sharing a 14-square-metre (150 square-ft) cell with 15 other people.
Last July, police ordered Liu, 48, to serve three years of re-education through labour on top of nearly one year in detention for drafting the petition, which urged the government to re-evaluate its crackown on student demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, and to free all political prisoners.
He was also accused of accepting illegal aid from human rights organisations abroad and of trying to form a group to promote protection of workers' rights.
Re-education through labour is a form of administrative punishment that can be imposed by the authorities without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Western human rights activists say it is increasingly favoured by the authorities as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications and publicity of a trial.
Liu took part in the Democracy Wall movement of the early 1980s and was sentenced in 1981 to a three-year jail term for "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement", or subversion.
Prominent dissident and former student leader Wang Dan, who drafted the petition together with Liu, was sentenced to 11 years in prison last month for conspiring to subvert the government -- a sentence that triggered international condemnation.
China dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
The Chinese authorities have dealt crushing blows to the struggling democracy movement in recent months.
Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or in labour camps.
Three pro-democracy activists are currently standing trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement in Hefei, capital of the central province of Anhui.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen that adjoins Hong Kong, two labour activists are standing trial for conspiring to subvert the government.
China pledged on Wednesday to curb a rush by provinces to invest in high-profile industries, but economists said defiance from regional authorities would impede attempts by the central government to restructure the economy.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, said many new state enterprises were doomed from the beginning due to blind investment in many provinces.
"From the day production began, (many enterprises) entered a vicious cycle of high investment, high consumption of resources, low production efficiency and poor management," the newspaper said in a front-page commentary.
Many old enterprises, unable to upgrade their technology, lose their competitive edge and become inefficient, it said.
The newspaper said blind investment was widespread, citing 22 provinces that listed car production as one of their pillar industries in their Five-Year Plan between 1996 and 2000 and the plan for 2010.
Twenty-four provinces listed electronics as one of their pillar industries through 2000, and 16 provinces said they would concentrate on machinery and chemicals, the newspaper said.
"This has been a major problem for China's economy for a long time," economist Mao Tianqi said in a telephone interview when asked about the blind investment.
Blind investment had also led to monopolies and local protectionism, with many provinces banning competitive products from neighbouring regions, the newspaper said.
It said China's economic structure was "unreasonable", with too many small enterprises, not enough large enterprises, too many low-end products and insufficient high technology items.
The central government planned to restructure the economy next year to curb concentration in high-profile industries and to boost efficiency, the newspaper said.
"Restructuring the economy...is a mission of extreme importance," it said.
The central government would try to divert investment into the manufacturing of products with big demand as well as high technology products, the newspaper said. It did not elaborate.
The government would try to break monopolies by encouraging joint ventures among provinces, the newspaper said, adding that business groups would be encouraged to shed affiliates that are not related to production, such as hospitals and kindergartens.
"There are many difficulties and contradictions in adjusting and improving the economic structure, but...the State Council's (cabinet's) determination will not waver," the newspaper said.
But economist Mao was not optimistic.
"This is not a problem that can be resolved in one year," Mao said.
Many local governments would defy or skirt decisions by the central government to limit investment in certain industries to a few regions, he said.
About one percent of China's estimated 100,000 state enterprises are hopelessly in debt and unattractive to investors looking for cheap companies to buy or to merge with.
The government has been dragging its feet on bankruptcies due to fears of mass unemployment and social unrest.
However, the number of bankruptcies in China -- unheard of for almost four decades -- was expected to more than double to 5,200 this year, or more than the total of the previous six years put together.
China's parliament, eager to shed its rubber stamp image, has vowed to crack down on lawless officials by intensifying supervision of the government's executive and judicial branches.
Tian Jiyun, vice-chairman of the National People's Congress, had conceded that the problem of officials disregarding the law was very serious in some departments, major newspapers said on Friday.
"Some officials are not strict when implementing the law and do not investigate legal violations," Tian told the opening of a nine-day seminar in the booming southern city of Shenzhen on Thursday.
"These phenomena are very serious in some regions and departments," said Tian, a member of the ruling Communist Party's 19-member Politburo.
Official media frequently carry reports of abuse of power by local officials, who run their areas of jurisdiction as virtual fiefdoms. The word of an official is often taken as law.
"Some officials go as far as to replace the law with their word," Tian said. "There are laws but some officials do not do things according to the law.
"Some use power to suppress the law, those enforcing the law break the law and some take the law into their own hands."
Some Chinese analysts saw Tian's remarks as an attempt to increase the say of parliament in Chinese politics.
Tian and his mentor, Qiao Shi, chairman of the National People's Congress, who sits on the party's omnipotent seven-member Standing Committee, have moved in recent years to boost the status of parliament.
Tian urged lawmaking bodies at all levels to step up supervision of the executive and judicial branches.
"Supervision is a very weak link of the work of the People's Congress," Tian said.
He urged all lawmakers to conscientiously supervise trials and the work of the government, prosecutors and police.
Last month, a court took 10 minutes to reject the appeal of dissident and former student leader Wang Dan and uphold an 11-year jail term for conspiring to subvert the government.
Another dissident, Chen Longde, attempted suicide in August by jumping from a third-floor window because he could no longer stand beating by guards at a labour camp, his family has said.
The labour camp denies any wrongdoing.
Chen, who broke his right leg and smashed three teeth, has been discharged from hospital and sent back to the labour camp, where he is serving three years of re-education through labour for sending a petition to parliament demanding the release of all political prisoners.
Re-education through labour is a form of administrative punishment that can be imposed by authorities without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Western human rights activists say the punishment is increasingly favoured by the authorities as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications and publicity of a trial.
A Chinese court has jailed a 56-year-old dissident for five years for subversion, dealing another blow to the country's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
The Intermediate People's Court in Xi'an city, in the northern province of Shaanxi, convicted Zhang Zong'ai this week of spreading "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement", his lawyer, Zhang Jiankang, said on Saturday.
The dissident, detained since June, has appealed to the Shaanxi provincial Higher People's Court, the Hong Kong-based Human Rights and Democracy in China Information Centre said.
"Their (Chinese authorities) intention is to kill the chicken for the monkey to see... to frighten other dissidents," a spokesman for the centre, which monitors human rights abuses in China, said in a telephone interview.
Zhang was previously jailed for five years for demanding Premier Li Peng be impeached for ordering the military to crush student-led pro-democracy demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989, the human rights watchdog said.
He lost his seat in the local lawmaking body along with his teaching job at the Xi'an Institute of Statistics and his wife divorced him after his incarceration in 1989, his family said.
Asked to comment on Zhang's latest conviction, his sister, Zhang Xin, said he was innocent.
"He was wrongly accused," the sister said by telephone. "He didn't commit any crime... He didn't do anything."
His lawyer told Reuters the court had found Zhang guilty of attacking China's judiciary in an interview with former student leader Wang Dan that was later published in a Hong Kong newspaper.
Wang, a former student leader of the 1989 democracy demonstrations, was sentenced to 11 years in prison last month for conspiring to subvert the government.
The court also found Zhang guilty of signing a petition last year urging authorities to show political tolerance, the lawyer said.
The court cleared Zhang of any wrongdoing in accepting money from an overseas group, the lawyer said. The court ruled Zhang did accept money but that he did not use the funds for counter-revolutionary activities.
The lawyer said the verdict also did not mention a charge in the bill of indictment that accused Zhang of "pledging loyalty" to the Taiwan authorities by writing to General Wego Chiang.
Chiang is the sole surviving son of the late Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek, who fled to Taiwan after losing the Chinese civil war to the Communists in 1949. China regards Taiwan as a rebel province.
The dissident had not mailed a letter to Chiang that was found in his home in Xi'an.
Beijing's Communists and Taipei's Nationalists have been political rivals for almost five decades.
In recent months, the Chinese authorities have dealt crushing blows to the struggling democracy movement.
Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
China dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Three pro-democracy activists are currently standing trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement in Hefei, capital of the central province of Anhui.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen that neighbours Hong Kong, two labour activists are standing trial for conspiring to subvert the government.
Taiwanese business leader Kao Ching-yuan has invited one of China's top policymakers on Taiwan to visit the island, but Beijing was tight-lipped on whether to accept the offer.
The invitation was offered to Wang Zhaoguo, director of the Chinese cabinet's Taiwan Affairs Office, in a private capacity, a spokesman for Kao told Reuters.
If Wang accepted and Taiwanese authorities allowed him to visit, he would be the most senior Chinese official to set foot on the island since the end of China's civil war in 1949.
Wang was quoted by the spokesman as saying he would be happy to visit if he had an opportunity, but there was no definite commitment to accept.
"If there was this opportunity, he would be very happy to go (to Taiwan). There is no definite concrete time," the spokesman said, speaking by telephone from the north China city of Tangshan.
In Taipei, a spokesman for the cabinet-level Mainland Affairs Council, which formulates Taiwan's policy towards China, said the council would be happy to see a visit by Wang but noted that procedures must be followed.
The Taiwan Affairs Office declined to comment on the council spokesman's remarks. Earlier, the office denied Taiwanese newspaper reports that Wang had accepted the invitation.
Kao is head of a delegation of nearly 80 Taiwanese businessmen, economists and officials, who arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for a 12-day visit.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin met members of the delegation on Thursday and tried to reassure Taiwanese investors, saying Beijing would not allow political differences to stand in the way of trade and investment.
In his meetings with other Chinese officials, Kao, vice-chairman of President Enterprises, had raised tax and labour problems faced by Taiwanese investors in China, the delegation's spokesman said. President Enterprises is Taiwan's biggest investor in China.
On Wednesday, Kao urged Beijing to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded ties.
The talks were suspended last year after Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui's landmark trip to the United States.
Beijing has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the Nationalist government collapsed on the mainland and fled to the island in 1949. China insists Taiwan is not entitled to official links with other states.
China has stepped up pressure on Taiwan to lift a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links between the two sides. Last week Beijing unilaterally announced a set of regulations to pave the way for direct links.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links since 1949. Indirect trade and investment has been allowed since the late 1980s, usually through Hong Kong.
Many Taiwanese business executives, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport, but Taiwan has been reluctant to remove the curbs, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
